THE LANCER'S WIFE
    

      I
    

      It was after Bourbaki's defeat in the east of France. The army, broken up,
      decimated, and worn out, had been obliged to retreat into Switzerland
      after that terrible campaign, and it was only its short duration that
      saved a hundred and fifty thousand men from certain death. Hunger, the
      terrible cold, forced marches in the snow without boots, over bad mountain
      roads, had caused us 'francs-tireurs', especially, the greatest suffering,
      for we were without tents, and almost without food, always in the van when
      we were marching toward Belfort, and in the rear when returning by the
      Jura. Of our little band that had numbered twelve hundred men on the first
      of January, there remained only twenty-two pale, thin, ragged wretches,
      when we at length succeeded in reaching Swiss territory.
    

      There we were safe, and could rest. Everybody knows what sympathy was
      shown to the unfortunate French army, and how well it was cared for. We
      all gained fresh life, and those who had been rich and happy before the
      war declared that they had never experienced a greater feeling of comfort
      than they did then. Just think. We actually had something to eat every
      day, and could sleep every night.
    

      Meanwhile, the war continued in the east of France, which had been
      excluded from the armistice. Besancon still kept the enemy in check, and
      the latter had their revenge by ravaging Franche Comte. Sometimes we heard
      that they had approached quite close to the frontier, and we saw Swiss
      troops, who were to form a line of observation between us and them, set
      out on their march.
    

      That pained us in the end, and, as we regained health and strength, the
      longing to fight took possession of us. It was disgraceful and irritating
      to know that within two or three leagues of us the Germans were victorious
      and insolent, to feel that we were protected by our captivity, and to feel
      that on that account we were powerless against them.
    

      One day our captain took five or six of us aside, and spoke to us about
      it, long and furiously. He was a fine fellow, that captain. He had been a
      sublieutenant in the Zouaves, was tall and thin and as hard as steel, and
      during the whole campaign he had cut out their work for the Germans. He
      fretted in inactivity, and could not accustom himself to the idea of being
      a prisoner and of doing nothing.
    

      “Confound it!” he said to us, “does it not pain you to
      know that there is a number of uhlans within two hours of us? Does it not
      almost drive you mad to know that those beggarly wretches are walking
      about as masters in our mountains, when six determined men might kill a
      whole spitful any day? I cannot endure it any longer, and I must go there.”
    

      “But how can you manage it, captain?”
    

      “How? It is not very difficult! Just as if we had not done a thing
      or two within the last six months, and got out of woods that were guarded
      by very different men from the Swiss. The day that you wish to cross over
      into France, I will undertake to get you there.”
    

      “That may be; but what shall we do in France without any arms?”
    

      “Without arms? We will get them over yonder, by Jove!”
    

      “You are forgetting the treaty,” another soldier said; “we
      shall run the risk of doing the Swiss an injury, if Manteuffel learns that
      they have allowed prisoners to return to France.”
    

      “Come,” said the captain, “those are all bad reasons. I
      mean to go and kill some Prussians; that is all I care about. If you do
      not wish to do as I do, well and good; only say so at once. I can quite
      well go by myself; I do not require anybody's company.”
    

      Naturally we all protested, and, as it was quite impossible to make the
      captain alter his mind, we felt obliged to promise to go with him. We
      liked him too much to leave him in the lurch, as he never failed us in any
      extremity; and so the expedition was decided on.
    

      II
    

      The captain had a plan of his own, that he had been cogitating over for
      some time. A man in that part of the country whom he knew was going to
      lend him a cart and six suits of peasants' clothes. We could hide under
      some straw at the bottom of the wagon, which would be loaded with Gruyere
      cheese, which he was supposed to be going to sell in France. The captain
      told the sentinels that he was taking two friends with him to protect his
      goods, in case any one should try to rob him, which did not seem an
      extraordinary precaution. A Swiss officer seemed to look at the wagon in a
      knowing manner, but that was in order to impress his soldiers. In a word,
      neither officers nor men could make it out.
    

      “Get up,” the captain said to the horses, as he cracked his
      whip, while our three men quietly smoked their pipes. I was half
      suffocated in my box, which only admitted the air through those holes in
      front, and at the same time I was nearly frozen, for it was terribly cold.
    

      “Get up,” the captain said again, and the wagon loaded with
      Gruyere cheese entered France.
    

      The Prussian lines were very badly guarded, as the enemy trusted to the
      watchfulness of the Swiss. The sergeant spoke North German, while our
      captain spoke the bad German of the Four Cantons, and so they could not
      understand each other. The sergeant, however, pretended to be very
      intelligent; and, in order to make us believe that he understood us, they
      allowed us to continue our journey; and, after travelling for seven hours,
      being continually stopped in the same manner, we arrived at a small
      village of the Jura in ruins, at nightfall.
    

      What were we going to do? Our only arms were the captain's whip, our
      uniforms our peasants' blouses, and our food the Gruyere cheese. Our sole
      wealth consisted in our ammunition, packages of cartridges which we had
      stowed away inside some of the large cheeses. We had about a thousand of
      them, just two hundred each, but we needed rifles, and they must be
      chassepots. Luckily, however, the captain was a bold man of an inventive
      mind, and this was the plan that he hit upon:
    

      While three of us remained hidden in a cellar in the abandoned village, he
      continued his journey as far as Besancon with the empty wagon and one man.
      The town was invested, but one can always make one's way into a town among
      the hills by crossing the tableland till within about ten miles of the
      walls, and then following paths and ravines on foot. They left their wagon
      at Omans, among the Germans, and escaped out of it at night on foot; so as
      to gain the heights which border the River Doubs; the next day they
      entered Besancon, where there were plenty of chassepots. There were nearly
      forty thousand of them left in the arsenal, and General Roland, a brave
      marine, laughed at the captain's daring project, but let him have six
      rifles and wished him “good luck.” There he had also found his
      wife, who had been through all the war with us before the campaign in the
      East, and who had been only prevented by illness from continuing with
      Bourbaki's army. She had recovered, however, in spite of the cold, which
      was growing more and more intense, and in spite of the numberless
      privations that awaited her, she persisted in accompanying her husband. He
      was obliged to give way to her, and they all three, the captain, his wife,
      and our comrade, started on their expedition.
    

      Going was nothing in comparison to returning. They were obliged to travel
      by night, so as to avoid meeting anybody, as the possession of six rifles
      would have made them liable to suspicion. But, in spite of everything, a
      week after leaving us, the captain and his two men were back with us
      again. The campaign was about to begin.
    

      III
    

      The first night of his arrival he began it himself, and, under pretext of
      examining the surrounding country, he went along the high road.
    

      I must tell you that the little village which served as our fortress was a
      small collection of poor, badly built houses, which had been deserted long
      before. It lay on a steep slope, which terminated in a wooded plain. The
      country people sell the wood; they send it down the slopes, which are
      called coulees, locally, and which lead down to the plain, and there they
      stack it into piles, which they sell thrice a year to the wood merchants.
      The spot where this market is held in indicated by two small houses by the
      side of the highroad, which serve for public houses. The captain had gone
      down there by way of one of these coulees.
    

      He had been gone about half an hour, and we were on the lookout at the top
      of the ravine, when we heard a shot. The captain had ordered us not to
      stir, and only to come to him when we heard him blow his trumpet. It was
      made of a goat's horn, and could be heard a league off; but it gave no
      sound, and, in spite of our cruel anxiety, we were obliged to wait in
      silence, with our rifles by our side.
    

      It is nothing to go down these coulees; one just lets one's self slide
      down; but it is more difficult to get up again; one has to scramble up by
      catching hold of the hanging branches of the trees, and sometimes on all
      fours, by sheer strength. A whole mortal hour passed, and he did not come;
      nothing moved in the brushwood. The captain's wife began to grow
      impatient. What could he be doing? Why did he not call us? Did the shot
      that we had heard proceed from an enemy, and had he killed or wounded our
      leader, her husband? They did not know what to think, but I myself fancied
      either that he was dead or that his enterprise was successful; and I was
      merely anxious and curious to know what he had done.
    

      Suddenly we heard the sound of his trumpet, and we were much surprised
      that instead of coming from below, as we had expected, it came from the
      village behind us. What did that mean? It was a mystery to us, but the
      same idea struck us all, that he had been killed, and that the Prussians
      were blowing the trumpet to draw us into an ambush. We therefore returned
      to the cottage, keeping a careful lookout with our fingers on the trigger,
      and hiding under the branches; but his wife, in spite of our entreaties,
      rushed on, leaping like a tigress. She thought that she had to avenge her
      husband, and had fixed the bayonet to her rifle, and we lost sight of her
      at the moment that we heard the trumpet again; and, a few moments later,
      we heard her calling out to us:
    

      “Come on! come on! He is alive! It is he!”
    

      We hastened on, and saw the captain smoking his pipe at the entrance of
      the village, but strangely enough, he was on horseback.
    

      “Ah! ah!” he said to us, “you see that there is
      something to be done here. Here I am on horseback already; I knocked over
      an uhlan yonder, and took his horse; I suppose they were guarding the
      wood, but it was by drinking and swilling in clover. One of them, the
      sentry at the door, had not time to see me before I gave him a sugarplum
      in his stomach, and then, before the others could come out, I jumped on
      the horse and was off like a shot. Eight or ten of them followed me, I
      think; but I took the crossroads through the woods. I have got scratched
      and torn a bit, but here I am, and now, my good fellows, attention, and
      take care! Those brigands will not rest until they have caught us, and we
      must receive them with rifle bullets. Come along; let us take up our
      posts!”
    

      We set out. One of us took up his position a good way from the village on
      the crossroads; I was posted at the entrance of the main street, where the
      road from the level country enters the village, while the two others, the
      captain and his wife, were in the middle of the village, near the church,
      whose tower served for an observatory and citadel.
    

      We had not been in our places long before we heard a shot, followed by
      another, and then two, then three. The first was evidently a chassepot
      —one recognized it by the sharp report, which sounds like the crack
      of a whip—while the other three came from the lancers' carbines.
    

      The captain was furious. He had given orders to the outpost to let the
      enemy pass and merely to follow them at a distance if they marched toward
      the village, and to join me when they had gone well between the houses.
      Then they were to appear suddenly, take the patrol between two fires, and
      not allow a single man to escape; for, posted as we were, the six of us
      could have hemmed in ten Prussians, if needful.
    

      “That confounded Piedelot has roused them,” the captain said,
      “and they will not venture to come on blindfolded any longer. And
      then I am quite sure that he has managed to get a shot into himself
      somewhere or other, for we hear nothing of him. It serves him right; why
      did he not obey orders?” And then, after a moment, he grumbled in
      his beard: “After all I am sorry for the poor fellow; he is so
      brave, and shoots so well!”
    

      The captain was right in his conjectures. We waited until evening, without
      seeing the uhlans; they had retreated after the first attack; but
      unfortunately we had not seen Piedelot, either. Was he dead or a prisoner?
      When night came, the captain proposed that we should go out and look for
      him, and so the three of us started. At the crossroads we found a broken
      rifle and some blood, while the ground was trampled down; but we did not
      find either a wounded man or a dead body, although we searched every
      thicket, and at midnight we returned without having discovered anything of
      our unfortunate comrade.
    

      “It is very strange,” the captain growled. “They must
      have killed him and thrown him into the bushes somewhere; they cannot
      possibly have taken him prisoner, as he would have called out for help. I
      cannot understand it at all.” Just as he said that, bright flames
      shot up in the direction of the inn on the high road, which illuminated
      the sky.
    

      “Scoundrels! cowards!” he shouted. “I will bet that they
      have set fire to the two houses on the marketplace, in order to have their
      revenge, and then they will scuttle off without saying a word. They will
      be satisfied with having killed a man and set fire to two houses. All
      right. It shall not pass over like that. We must go for them; they will
      not like to leave their illuminations in order to fight.”
    

      “It would be a great stroke of luck if we could set Piedelot free at
      the same time,” some one said.
    

      The five of us set off, full of rage and hope. In twenty minutes we had
      got to the bottom of the coulee, and had not yet seen any one when we were
      within a hundred yards of the inn. The fire was behind the house, and all
      we saw of it was the reflection above the roof. However, we were walking
      rather slowly, as we were afraid of an ambush, when suddenly we heard
      Piedelot's well-known voice. It had a strange sound, however; for it was
      at the same time—dull and vibrating, stifled and clear, as if he
      were calling out as loud as he could with a bit of rag stuffed into his
      mouth. He seemed to be hoarse and gasping, and the unlucky fellow kept
      exclaiming: “Help! Help!”
    

      We sent all thoughts of prudence to the devil, and in two bounds we were
      at the back of the inn, where a terrible sight met our eyes.
    

      IV
    

      Piedelot was being burned alive. He was writhing in the midst of a heap of
      fagots, tied to a stake, and the flames were licking him with their
      burning tongues. When he saw us, his tongue seemed to stick in his throat;
      he drooped his head, and seemed as if he were going to die. It was only
      the affair of a moment to upset the burning pile, to scatter the embers,
      and to cut the ropes that fastened him.
    

      Poor fellow! In what a terrible state we found him. The evening before he
      had had his left arm broken, and it seemed as if he had been badly beaten
      since then, for his whole body was covered with wounds, bruises and blood.
      The flames had also begun their work on him, and he had two large burns,
      one on his loins and the other on his right thigh, and his beard and hair
      were scorched. Poor Piedelot!
    

      No one knows the terrible rage we felt at this sight! We would have rushed
      headlong at a hundred thousand Prussians; our thirst for vengeance was
      intense. But the cowards had run away, leaving their crime behind them.
      Where could we find them now? Meanwhile, however, the captain's wife was
      looking after Piedelot, and dressing his wounds as best she could, while
      the captain himself shook hands with him excitedly, and in a few minutes
      he came to himself.
    

      “Good-morning, captain; good-morning, all of you,” he said.
      “Ah! the scoundrels, the wretches! Why, twenty of them came to
      surprise us.”
    

      “Twenty, do you say?”
    

      “Yes; there was a whole band of them, and that is why I disobeyed
      orders, captain, and fired on them, for they would have killed you all,
      and I preferred to stop them. That frightened them, and they did not
      venture to go farther than the crossroads. They were such cowards. Four of
      them shot at me at twenty yards, as if I had been a target, and then they
      slashed me with their swords. My arm was broken, so that I could only use
      my bayonet with one hand.”
    

      “But why did you not call for help?”
    

      “I took good care not to do that, for you would all have come; and
      you would neither have been able to defend me nor yourselves, being only
      five against twenty.”
    

      “You know that we should not have allowed you to have been taken,
      poor old fellow.”
    

      “I preferred to die by myself, don't you see! I did not want to
      bring you here, for it would have been a mere ambush.”
    

      “Well, we will not talk about it any more. Do you feel rather
      easier?”
    

      “No, I am suffocating. I know that I cannot live much longer. The
      brutes! They tied me to a tree, and beat me till I was half dead, and then
      they shook my broken arm; but I did not make a sound. I would rather have
      bitten my tongue out than have called out before them. Now I can tell what
      I am suffering and shed tears; it does one good. Thank you, my kind
      friends.”
    

      “Poor Piedelot! But we will avenge you, you may be sure!”
    

      “Yes, yes; I want you to do that. There is, in particular, a woman
      among them who passes as the wife of the lancer whom the captain killed
      yesterday. She is dressed like a lancer, and she tortured me the most
      yesterday, and suggested burning me; and it was she who set fire to the
      wood. Oh! the wretch, the brute! Ah! how I am suffering! My loins, my
      arms!” and he fell back gasping and exhausted, writhing in his
      terrible agony, while the captain's wife wiped the perspiration from his
      forehead, and we all shed tears of grief and rage, as if we had been
      children. I will not describe the end to you; he died half an hour later,
      previously telling us in what direction the enemy had gone. When he was
      dead we gave ourselves time to bury him, and then we set out in pursuit of
      them, with our hearts full of fury and hatred.
    

      “We will throw ourselves on the whole Prussian army, if it be
      necessary,” the captain said; “but we will avenge Piedelot. We
      must catch those scoundrels. Let us swear to die, rather than not to find
      them; and if I am killed first, these are my orders: All the prisoners
      that you take are to be shot immediately, and as for the lancer's wife,
      she is to be tortured before she is put to death.”
    

      “She must not be shot, because she is a woman,” the captain's
      wife said. “If you survive, I am sure that you would not shoot a
      woman. Torturing her will be quite sufficient; but if you are killed in
      this pursuit, I want one thing, and that is to fight with her; I will kill
      her with my own hands, and the others can do what they like with her if
      she kills me.”
    

      “We will outrage her! We will burn her! We will tear her to pieces!
      Piedelot shall be avenged!
    

      “An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth!”
    

      V
    

      The next morning we unexpectedly fell on an outpost of uhlans four leagues
      away. Surprised by our sudden attack, they were not able to mount their
      horses, nor even to defend themselves; and in a few moments we had five
      prisoner, corresponding to our own number. The captain questioned them,
      and from their answers we felt certain that they were the same whom we had
      encountered the previous day. Then a very curious operation took place.
      One of us was told off to ascertain their sex, and nothing can describe
      our joy when we discovered what we were seeking among them, the female
      executioner who had tortured our friend.
    

      The four others were shot on the spot, with their backs to us and close to
      the muzzles of our rifles; and then we turned our attention to the woman.
      What were we going to do with her? I must acknowledge that we were all of
      us in favor of shooting her. Hatred, and the wish to avenge Piedelot, had
      extinguished all pity in us, and we had forgotten that we were going to
      shoot a woman, but a woman reminded us of it, the captain's wife; at her
      entreaties, therefore, we determined to keep her a prisoner.
    

      The captain's poor wife was to be severely punished for this act of
      clemency.
    

      The next day we heard that the armistice had been extended to the eastern
      part of France, and we had to put an end to our little campaign. Two of
      us, who belonged to the neighborhood, returned home, so there were only
      four of us, all told: the captain, his wife, and two men. We belonged to
      Besancon, which was still being besieged in spite of the armistice.
    

      “Let us stop here,” said the captain. “I cannot believe
      that the war is going to end like this. The devil take it! Surely there
      are men still left in France; and now is the time to prove what they are
      made of. The spring is coming on, and the armistice is only a trap laid
      for the Prussians. During the time that it lasts, a new army will be
      raised, and some fine morning we shall fall upon them again. We shall be
      ready, and we have a hostage—let us remain here.”
    

      We fixed our quarters there. It was terribly cold, and we did not go out
      much, and somebody had always to keep the female prisoner in sight.
    

      She was sullen, and never said anything, or else spoke of her husband,
      whom the captain had killed. She looked at him continually with fierce
      eyes, and we felt that she was tortured by a wild longing for revenge.
      That seemed to us to be the most suitable punishment for the terrible
      torments that she had made Piedelot suffer, for impotent vengeance is such
      intense pain!
    

      Alas! we who knew how to avenge our comrade ought to have thought that
      this woman would know how to avenge her husband, and have been on our
      guard. It is true that one of us kept watch every night, and that at first
      we tied her by a long rope to the great oak bench that was fastened to the
      wall. But, by and by, as she had never tried to escape, in spite of her
      hatred for us, we relaxed our extreme prudence, and allowed her to sleep
      somewhere else except on the bench, and without being tied. What had we to
      fear? She was at the end of the room, a man was on guard at the door, and
      between her and the sentinel the captain's wife and two other men used to
      lie. She was alone and unarmed against four, so there could be no danger.
    

      One night when we were asleep, and the captain was on guard, the lancer's
      wife was lying more quietly in her corner than usual, and she had even
      smiled for the first time since she had been our prisoner during the
      evening. Suddenly, however, in the middle of the night, we were all
      awakened by a terrible cry. We got up, groping about, and at once stumbled
      over a furious couple who were rolling about and fighting on the ground.
      It was the captain and the lancer's wife. We threw ourselves on them, and
      separated them in a moment. She was shouting and laughing, and he seemed
      to have the death rattle. All this took place in the dark. Two of us held
      her, and when a light was struck a terrible sight met our eyes. The
      captain was lying on the floor in a pool of blood, with an enormous gash
      in his throat, and his sword bayonet, that had been taken from his rifle,
      was sticking in the red, gaping wound. A few minutes afterward he died,
      without having been able to utter a word.
    

      His wife did not shed a tear. Her eyes were dry, her throat was
      contracted, and she looked at the lancer's wife steadfastly, and with a
      calm ferocity that inspired fear.
    

      “This woman belongs to me,” she said to us suddenly. “You
      swore to me not a week ago to let me kill her as I chose, if she killed my
      husband; and you must keep your oath. You must fasten her securely to the
      fireplace, upright against the back of it, and then you can go where you
      like, but far from here. I will take my revenge on her myself. Leave the
      captain's body, and we three, he, she and I, will remain here.”
    

      We obeyed, and went away. She promised to write to us to Geneva, as we
      were returning thither.
    

      VI
    

      Two days later I received the following letter, dated the day after we had
      left, that had been written at an inn on the high road:
    

      “MY FRIEND: I am writing to you, according to my promise. For the
      moment I am at the inn, where I have just handed my prisoner over to a
      Prussian officer.
    

      “I must tell you, my friend, that this poor woman has left two
      children in Germany. She had followed her husband, whom she adored, as she
      did not wish him to be exposed to the risks of war by himself, and as her
      children were with their grandparents. I have learned all this since
      yesterday, and it has turned my ideas of vengeance into more humane
      feelings. At the very moment when I felt pleasure in insulting this woman,
      and in threatening her with the most fearful torments, in recalling
      Piedelot, who had been burned alive, and in threatening her with a similar
      death, she looked at me coldly, and said:
    

      “'What have you got to reproach me with, Frenchwoman? You think that
      you will do right in avenging your husband's death, is not that so?'
    

      “'Yes,' I replied.
    

      “'Very well, then; in killing him, I did what you are going to do in
      burning me. I avenged my husband, for your husband killed him.'
    

      “'Well,' I replied, 'as you approve of this vengeance, prepare to
      endure it.'
    

      “'I do not fear it.'
    

      “And in fact she did not seem to have lost courage. Her face was
      calm, and she looked at me without trembling, while I brought wood and
      dried leaves together, and feverishly threw on to them the powder from
      some cartridges, which was to make her funeral pile the more cruel.
    

      “I hesitated in my thoughts of persecution for a moment. But the
      captain was there, pale and covered with blood, and he seemed to be
      looking at me with his large, glassy eyes, and I applied myself to my work
      again after kissing his pale lips. Suddenly, however, on raising my head,
      I saw that she was crying, and I felt rather surprised.
    

      “'So you are frightened?' I said to her.
    

      “'No, but when I saw you kiss your husband, I thought of mine, of
      all whom I love.'
    

      “She continued to sob, but stopping suddenly, she said to me in
      broken words and in a low voice:
    

      “'Have you any children?'
    

      “A shiver rare over me, for I guessed that this poor woman had some.
      She asked me to look in a pocketbook which was in her bosom, and in it I
      saw two photographs of quite young children, a boy and a girl, with those
      kind, gentle, chubby faces that German children have. In it there were
      also two locks of light hair and a letter in a large, childish hand, and
      beginning with German words which meant:
    

      “'My dear little mother.
    

      “'I could not restrain my tears, my dear friend, and so I untied
      her, and without venturing to look at the face of my poor dead husband,
      who was not to be avenged, I went with her as far as the inn. She is free;
      I have just left her, and she kissed me with tears. I am going upstairs to
      my husband; come as soon as possible, my dear friend, to look for our two
      bodies.'”
    

      I set off with all speed, and when I arrived there was a Prussian patrol
      at the cottage; and when I asked what it all meant, I was told that there
      was a captain of francs-tireurs and his wife inside, both dead. I gave
      their names; they saw that I knew them, and I begged to be allowed to
      arrange their funeral.
    

      “Somebody has already undertaken it,” was the reply. “Go
      in if you wish to, as you know them. You can settle about their funeral
      with their friend.”
    

      I went in. The captain and his wife were lying side by side on a bed, and
      were covered by a sheet. I raised it, and saw that the woman had inflicted
      a similar wound in her throat to that from which her husband had died.
    

      At the side of the bed there sat, watching and weeping, the woman who had
      been mentioned to me as their best friend. It was the lancer's wife.