THE IMPOLITE SEX
    

           Madame de X. to Madame de L.

                    ETRETAT, Friday.
My Dear Aunt:


      I am coming to see you without anyone knowing it. I shall be at Les
      Fresnes on the 2d of September, the day before the hunting season opens,
      as I do not want to miss it, so that I may tease these gentlemen. You are
      too good, aunt, and you will allow them, as you usually do when there are
      no strange guests, to come to table, under pretext of fatigue, without
      dressing or shaving for the occasion.
    

      They are delighted, of course, when I am not present. But I shall be there
      and will hold a review, like a general, at dinner time; and, if I find a
      single one of them at all careless in dress, no matter how little, I mean
      to send them down to the kitchen with the servants.
    

      The men of to-day have so little consideration for others and so little
      good manners that one must be always severe with them. We live indeed in
      an age of vulgarity. When they quarrel, they insult each other in terms
      worthy of longshoremen, and, in our presence, they do not conduct
      themselves even as well as our servants. It is at the seaside that you see
      this most clearly. They are to be found there in battalions, and you can
      judge them in the lump. Oh! what coarse beings they are!
    

      Just imagine, in a train, a gentleman who looked well, as I thought at
      first sight, thanks to his tailor, carefully took off his boots in order
      to put on a pair of old shoes! Another, an old man who was probably some
      wealthy upstart (these are the most ill-bred), while sitting opposite to
      me, had the delicacy to place his two feet on the seat quite close to me.
      This is a positive fact.
    

      At the watering-places the vulgarity is unrestrained. I must here make one
      admission—that my indignation is perhaps due to the fact that I am
      not accustomed to associate, as a rule, with the sort of people one comes
      across here, for I should be less shocked by their manners if I had the
      opportunity of observing them oftener. In the office of the hotel I was
      nearly thrown down by a young man who snatched the key over my head.
      Another knocked against me so violently without begging my pardon or
      lifting his hat, coming away from a ball at the Casino, that it gave me a
      pain in the chest. It is the same way with all of them. Watch them
      addressing ladies on the terrace; they scarcely ever bow. They merely
      raise their hands to their headgear. But, indeed, as they are all more or
      less bald, it is the best plan.
    

      But what exasperates and disgusts me particularly is the liberty they take
      of talking in public, without any kind of precaution, about the most
      revolting adventures. When two men are together, they relate to each
      other, in the broadest language and with the most abominable comments
      really horrible stories, without caring in the slightest degree whether a
      woman's ear is within reach of their voices. Yesterday, on the beach, I
      was forced to leave the place where I was sitting in order not to be any
      longer the involuntary confidante of an obscene anecdote, told in such
      immodest language that I felt just as humiliated as indignant at having
      heard it. Would not the most elementary good-breeding teach them to speak
      in a lower tone about such matters when we are near at hand. Etretat is,
      moreover, the country of gossip and scandal. From five to seven o'clock
      you can see people wandering about in quest of scandal, which they retail
      from group to group. As you remarked to me, my dear aunt, tittle-tattle is
      the mark of petty individuals and petty minds. It is also the consolation
      of women who are no longer loved or sought after. It is enough for me to
      observe the women who are fondest of gossiping to be persuaded that you
      are quite right.
    

      The other day I was present at a musical evening at the Casino, given by a
      remarkable artist, Madame Masson, who sings in a truly delightful manner.
      I took the opportunity of applauding the admirable Coquelin, as well as
      two charming vaudeville performers, M——and Meillet. I met, on
      this occasion, all the bathers who were at the beach. It is no great
      distinction this year.
    

      Next day I went to lunch at Yport. I noticed a tall man with a beard,
      coming out of a large house like a castle. It was the painter, Jean Paul
      Laurens. He is not satisfied apparently with imprisoning the subjects of
      his pictures, he insists on imprisoning himself.
    

      Then I found myself seated on the shingle close to a man still young, of
      gentle and refined appearance, who was reading poetry. But he read it with
      such concentration, with such passion, I may say, that he did not even
      raise his eyes towards me. I was somewhat astonished and asked the
      proprietor of the baths, without appearing to be much concerned, the name
      of this gentleman. I laughed to myself a little at this reader of rhymes;
      he seemed behind the age, for a man. This person, I thought, must be a
      simpleton. Well, aunt, I am now infatuated about this stranger. Just
      fancy, his name is Sully Prudhomme! I went back and sat down beside him
      again so as to get a good look at him. His face has an expression of
      calmness and of penetration. Somebody came to look for him, and I heard
      his voice, which is sweet and almost timid. He would certainly not tell
      obscene stories aloud in public or knock up against ladies without
      apologizing. He is assuredly a man of refinement, but his refinement is of
      an almost morbid, sensitive character, I will try this winter to get an
      introduction to him.
    

I have no more news, my dear aunt, and I must finish this letter in
haste, as the mail will soon close. I kiss your hands and your cheeks.
Your devoted niece,
                    BERTHE DE X.


      P. S.—I should add, however, by way of justification of French
      politeness, that our fellow-countrymen are, when travelling, models of
      good manners in comparison with the abominable English, who seem to have
      been brought up in a stable, so careful are they not to discommode
      themselves in any way, while they always discommode their neighbors.
    

           Madame de L. to Madame de X.

                    LES FRESNES, Saturday.
My Dear Child:


      Many of the things you have said to me are very sensible, but that does
      not prevent you from being wrong. Like you, I used formerly to feel very
      indignant at the impoliteness of men, who, as I supposed, constantly
      treated me with neglect; but, as I grew older and reflected on everything,
      putting aside coquetry, and observing things without taking any part in
      them myself, I perceived this much—that if men are not always
      polite, women are always indescribably rude.
    

      We imagine that we should be permitted to do anything, my darling, and at
      the same time we consider that we have a right to the utmost respect, and
      in the most flagrant manner we commit actions devoid of that elementary
      good-breeding of which you speak so feelingly.
    

      I find, on the contrary, that men consider us much more than we consider
      them. Besides, darling, men must needs be, and are, what we make them. In
      a state of society, where women are all true gentlewomen, all men would
      become gentlemen.
    

      Come now; just observe and reflect.
    

      Look at two women meeting in the street. What an attitude each assumes
      towards the other! What disparaging looks! What contempt they throw into
      each glance! How they toss their heads while they inspect each other to
      find something to condemn! And, if the footpath is narrow, do you think
      one woman would make room for another, or would beg pardon as she sweeps
      by? Never! When two men jostle each other by accident in some narrow lane,
      each of them bows and at the same time gets out of the other's way, while
      we women press against each other stomach to stomach, face to face,
      insolently staring each other out of countenance.
    

      Look at two women who are acquaintances meeting on a staircase outside the
      door of a friend's drawing-room, one of them just leaving, the other about
      to go in. They begin to talk to each other and block up all the landing.
      If anyone happens to be coming up behind them, man or woman, do you
      imagine that they will put themselves half an inch out of their way?
      Never! never!
    

      I was waiting myself, with my watch in my hands, one day last winter at a
      certain drawing-room door. And, behind me, two gentlemen were also waiting
      without showing any readiness, as I did, to lose their temper. The reason
      was that they had long grown accustomed to our unconscionable insolence.
    

      The other day, before leaving Paris, I went to dine with no less a person
      than your husband, in the Champs Elysees, in order to enjoy the fresh air.
      Every table was occupied. The waiter asked us to wait and there would soon
      be a vacant table.
    

      At that moment I noticed an elderly lady of noble figure, who, having paid
      for her dinner, seemed on the point of going away. She saw me, scanned me
      from head to foot, and did not budge. For more than a quarter of an hour
      she sat there, immovable, putting on her gloves, and calmly staring at
      those who were waiting like myself. Now, two young men who were just
      finishing their dinner, having seen me in their turn, hastily summoned the
      waiter, paid what they owed, and at once offered me their seats, even
      insisting on standing while waiting for their change. And, bear in mind,
      my fair niece, that I am no longer pretty, like you, but old and
      white-haired.
    

      It is we, you see, who should be taught politeness, and the task would be
      such a difficult one that Hercules himself would not be equal to it. You
      speak to me about Etretat and about the people who indulged in “tittle-tattle”
      along the beach of that delightful watering-place. It is a spot now lost
      to me, a thing of the past, but I found much amusement therein days gone
      by.
    

      There were only a few of us, people in good society, really good society,
      and a few artists, and we all fraternized. We paid little attention to
      gossip in those days.
    

      As we had no monotonous Casino, where people only gather for show, where
      they whisper, where they dance stupidly, where they succeed in thoroughly
      boring one another, we sought some other way of passing our evenings
      pleasantly. Now, just guess what came into the head of one of our
      husbands? Nothing less than to go and dance each night in one of the
      farm-houses in the neighborhood.
    

      We started out in a group with a street-organ, generally played by Le
      Poittevin, the painter, with a cotton nightcap on his head. Two men
      carried lanterns. We followed in procession, laughing and chattering like
      a pack of fools.
    

      We woke up the farmer and his servant-maids and farm hands. We got them to
      make onion soup (horror!), and we danced under the apple trees, to the
      sound of the barrel-organ. The cocks waking up began to crow in the
      darkness of the out-houses; the horses began prancing on the straw of
      their stables. The cool air of the country caressed our cheeks with the
      smell of grass and of new-mown hay.
    

      How long ago it is! How long ago it is! It is thirty years since then!
    

I do not want you, my darling, to come for the opening of the hunting
season. Why spoil the pleasure of our friends by inflicting on them
fashionable toilettes on this day of vigorous exercise in the country?
This is the way, child, that men are spoiled. I embrace you. Your old
aunt,
                  GENEVIEVE DE L.