THE SPASM
    

      The hotel guests slowly entered the dining-room and took their places. The
      waiters did not hurry themselves, in order to give the late comers a
      chance and thus avoid the trouble of bringing in the dishes a second time.
      The old bathers, the habitues, whose season was almost over, glanced,
      gazed toward the door whenever it opened, to see what new faces might
      appear.
    

      This is the principal distraction of watering places. People look forward
      to the dinner hour in order to inspect each day's new arrivals, to find
      out who they are, what they do, and what they think. We always have a
      vague desire to meet pleasant people, to make agreeable acquaintances,
      perhaps to meet with a love adventure. In this life of elbowings, unknown
      strangers assume an extreme importance. Curiosity is aroused, sympathy is
      ready to exhibit itself, and sociability is the order of the day.
    

      We cherish antipathies for a week and friendships for a month; we see
      people with different eyes, when we view them through the medium of
      acquaintanceship at watering places. We discover in men suddenly, after an
      hour's chat, in the evening after dinner, under the trees in the park
      where the healing spring bubbles up, a high intelligence and astonishing
      merits, and a month afterward we have completely forgotten these new
      friends, who were so fascinating when we first met them.
    

      Permanent and serious ties are also formed here sooner than anywhere else.
      People see each other every day; they become acquainted very quickly, and
      their affection is tinged with the sweetness and unrestraint of
      long-standing intimacies. We cherish in after years the dear and tender
      memories of those first hours of friendship, the memory of those first
      conversations in which a soul was unveiled, of those first glances which
      interrogate and respond to questions and secret thoughts which the mouth
      has not as yet uttered, the memory of that first cordial confidence, the
      memory of that delightful sensation of opening our hearts to those who
      seem to open theirs to us in return.
    

      And the melancholy of watering places, the monotony of days that are all
      alike, proves hourly an incentive to this heart expansion.
    

      Well, this evening, as on every other evening, we awaited the appearance
      of strange faces.
    

      Only two appeared, but they were very remarkable, a man and a woman
      —father and daughter. They immediately reminded me of some of Edgar
      Poe's characters; and yet there was about them a charm, the charm
      associated with misfortune. I looked upon them as the victims of fate. The
      man was very tall and thin, rather stooped, with perfectly white hair, too
      white for his comparatively youthful physiognomy; and there was in his
      bearing and in his person that austerity peculiar to Protestants. The
      daughter, who was probably twenty-four or twenty-five, was small in
      stature, and was also very thin, very pale, and she had the air of one who
      was worn out with utter lassitude. We meet people like this from time to
      time, who seem too weak for the tasks and the needs of daily life, too
      weak to move about, to walk, to do all that we do every day. She was
      rather pretty; with a transparent, spiritual beauty. And she ate with
      extreme slowness, as if she were almost incapable of moving her arms.
    

      It must have been she, assuredly, who had come to take the waters.
    

      They sat facing me, on the opposite side of the table; and I at once
      noticed that the father had a very singular, nervous twitching.
    

      Every time he wanted to reach an object, his hand described a sort of
      zigzag before it succeeded in reaching what it was in search of, and after
      a little while this movement annoyed me so that I turned aside my head in
      order not to see it.
    

      I noticed, too, that the young girl, during meals, wore a glove on her
      left hand.
    

      After dinner I went for a stroll in the park of the bathing establishment.
      This led toward the little Auvergnese station of Chatel-Guyon, hidden in a
      gorge at the foot of the high mountain, from which flowed so many boiling
      springs, arising from the deep bed of extinct volcanoes. Over yonder,
      above our heads, the domes of extinct craters lifted their ragged peaks
      above the rest in the long mountain chain. For Chatel-Guyon is situated at
      the entrance to the land of mountain domes.
    

      Beyond it stretches out the region of peaks, and, farther on again the
      region of precipitous summits.
    

      The “Puy de Dome” is the highest of the domes, the Peak of
      Sancy is the loftiest of the peaks, and Cantal is the most precipitous of
      these mountain heights.
    

      It was a very warm evening, and I was walking up and down a shady path,
      listening to the opening, strains of the Casino band, which was playing on
      an elevation overlooking the park.
    

      And I saw the father and the daughter advancing slowly in my direction. I
      bowed as one bows to one's hotel companions at a watering place; and the
      man, coming to a sudden halt, said to me:
    

      “Could you not, monsieur, tell us of a nice walk to take, short,
      pretty, and not steep; and pardon my troubling you?”
    

      I offered to show them the way toward the valley through which the little
      river flowed, a deep valley forming a gorge between two tall, craggy,
      wooded slopes.
    

      They gladly accepted my offer.
    

      And we talked, naturally, about the virtue of the waters.
    

      “Oh,” he said, “my daughter has a strange malady, the
      seat of which is unknown. She suffers from incomprehensible nervous
      attacks. At one time the doctors think she has an attack of heart disease,
      at another time they imagine it is some affection of the liver, and at
      another they declare it to be a disease of the spine. To-day this protean
      malady, that assumes a thousand forms and a thousand modes of attack, is
      attributed to the stomach, which is the great caldron and regulator of the
      body. This is why we have come here. For my part, I am rather inclined to
      think it is the nerves. In any case it is very sad.”
    

      Immediately the remembrance of the violent spasmodic movement of his hand
      came back to my mind, and I asked him:
    

      “But is this not the result of heredity? Are not your own nerves
      somewhat affected?”
    

      He replied calmly:
    

      “Mine? Oh, no-my nerves have always been very steady.”
    

      Then, suddenly, after a pause, he went on:
    

      “Ah! You were alluding to the jerking movement of my hand every time
      I try to reach for anything? This arises from a terrible experience which
      I had. Just imagine, this daughter of mine was actually buried alive!”
    

      I could only utter, “Ah!” so great were my astonishment and
      emotion.
    

      He continued:
    

      “Here is the story. It is simple. Juliette had been subject for some
      time to serious attacks of the heart. We believed that she had disease of
      that organ, and were prepared for the worst.
    

      “One day she was carried into the house cold, lifeless, dead. She
      had fallen down unconscious in the garden. The doctor certified that life
      was extinct. I watched by her side for a day and two nights. I laid her
      with my own hands in the coffin, which I accompanied to the cemetery,
      where she was deposited in the family vault. It is situated in the very
      heart of Lorraine.
    

      “I wished to have her interred with her jewels, bracelets,
      necklaces, rings, all presents which she had received from me, and wearing
      her first ball dress.
    

      “You may easily imagine my state of mind when I re-entered our home.
      She was the only one I had, for my wife had been dead for many years. I
      found my way to my own apartment in a half-distracted condition, utterly
      exhausted, and sank into my easy-chair, without the capacity to think or
      the strength to move. I was nothing better now than a suffering, vibrating
      machine, a human being who had, as it were, been flayed alive; my soul was
      like an open wound.
    

      “My old valet, Prosper, who had assisted me in placing Juliette in
      her coffin, and aided me in preparing her for her last sleep, entered the
      room noiselessly, and asked:
    

      “'Does monsieur want anything?'
    

      “I merely shook my head in reply.
    

      “'Monsieur is wrong,' he urged. 'He will injure his health. Would
      monsieur like me to put him to bed?'
    

      “I answered: 'No, let me alone!'
    

      “And he left the room.
    

      “I know not how many hours slipped away. Oh, what a night, what a
      night! It was cold. My fire had died out in the huge grate; and the wind,
      the winter wind, an icy wind, a winter hurricane, blew with a regular,
      sinister noise against the windows.
    

      “How many hours slipped away? There I was without sleeping,
      powerless, crushed, my eyes wide open, my legs stretched out, my body
      limp, inanimate, and my mind torpid with despair. Suddenly the great
      doorbell, the great bell of the vestibule, rang out.
    

      “I started so that my chair cracked under me. The solemn, ponderous
      sound vibrated through the empty country house as through a vault. I
      turned round to see what the hour was by the clock. It was just two in the
      morning. Who could be coming at such an hour?
    

      “And, abruptly, the bell again rang twice. The servants, without
      doubt, were afraid to get up. I took a wax candle and descended the
      stairs. I was on the point of asking: 'Who is there?'
    

      “Then I felt ashamed of my weakness, and I slowly drew back the
      heavy bolts. My heart was throbbing wildly. I was frightened. I opened the
      door brusquely, and in the darkness I distinguished a white figure,
      standing erect, something that resembled an apparition.
    

      “I recoiled petrified with horror, faltering:
    

      “'Who-who-who are you?'
    

      “A voice replied:
    

      “'It is I, father.'
    

      “It was my daughter.
    

      “I really thought I must be mad, and I retreated backward before
      this advancing spectre. I kept moving away, making a sign with my hand,'
      as if to drive the phantom away, that gesture which you have noticed—that
      gesture which has remained with me ever since.
    

      “'Do not be afraid, papa,' said the apparition. 'I was not dead.
      Somebody tried to steal my rings and cut one of my fingers; the blood
      began to flow, and that restored me to life.'
    

      “And, in fact, I could see that her hand was covered with blood.
    

      “I fell on my knees, choking with sobs and with a rattling in my
      throat.
    

      “Then, when I had somewhat collected my thoughts, though I was still
      so bewildered that I scarcely realized the awesome happiness that had
      befallen me, I made her go up to my room and sit dawn in my easy-chair;
      then I rang excitedly for Prosper to get him to rekindle the fire and to
      bring some wine, and to summon assistance.
    

      “The man entered, stared at my daughter, opened his mouth with a
      gasp of alarm and stupefaction, and then fell back dead.
    

      “It was he who had opened the vault, who had mutilated and then
      abandoned my daughter; for he could not efface the traces of the theft. He
      had not even taken the trouble to put back the coffin into its place,
      feeling sure, besides, that he would not be suspected by me, as I trusted
      him absolutely.
    

      “You see, monsieur, that we are very unfortunate people.”
    

      He was silent.
    

      The night had fallen, casting its shadows over the desolate, mournful
      vale, and a sort of mysterious fear possessed me at finding myself by the
      side of those strange beings, of this young girl who had come back from
      the tomb, and this father with his uncanny spasm.
    

      I found it impossible to make any comment on this dreadful story. I only
      murmured:
    

      “What a horrible thing!”
    

      Then, after a minute's silence, I added:
    

      “Let us go indoors. I think it is growing cool.”
    

      And we made our way back to the hotel.