THE ENGLISHMAN OF ETRETAT

 A great English poet has just crossed over to France in order to greet
      Victor Hugo. All the newspapers are full of his name and he is the great
      topic of conversation in all drawing-rooms. Fifteen years ago I had
      occasion several times to meet Algernon Charles Swinburne. I will attempt
      to show him just as I saw him and to give an idea of the strange
      impression he made on me, which will remain with me throughout time.

 I believe it was in 1867 or in 1868 that an unknown young Englishman came
      to Etretat and bought a little hut hidden under great trees. It was said
      that he lived there, always alone, in a strange manner; and he aroused the
      inimical surprise of the natives, for the inhabitants were sullen and
      foolishly malicious, as they always are in little towns.

 They declared that this whimsical Englishman ate nothing but boiled,
      roasted or stewed monkey; that he would see no one; that he talked to
      himself hours at a time and many other surprising things that made people
      think that he was different from other men. They were surprised that he
      should live alone with a monkey. Had it been a cat or a dog they would
      have said nothing. But a monkey! Was that not frightful? What savage
      tastes the man must have!

 I knew this young man only from seeing him in the streets. He was short,
      plump, without being fat, mild-looking, and he wore a little blond
      mustache, which was almost invisible.

 Chance brought us together. This savage had amiable and pleasing manners,
      but he was one of those strange Englishmen that one meets here and there
      throughout the world.

 Endowed with remarkable intelligence, he seemed to live in a fantastic
      dream, as Edgar Poe must have lived. He had translated into English a
      volume of strange Icelandic legends, which I ardently desired to see
      translated into French. He loved the supernatural, the dismal and
      grewsome, but he spoke of the most marvellous things with a calmness that
      was typically English, to which his gentle and quiet voice gave a
      semblance of reality that was maddening.

 Full of a haughty disdain for the world, with its conventions, prejudices
      and code of morality, he had nailed to his house a name that was boldly
      impudent. The keeper of a lonely inn who should write on his door: “Travellers
      murdered here!” could not make a more sinister jest. I never had
      entered his dwelling, when one day I received an invitation to luncheon,
      following an accident that had occurred to one of his friends, who had
      been almost drowned and whom I had attempted to rescue.

 Although I was unable to reach the man until he had already been rescued,
      I received the hearty thanks of the two Englishmen, and the following day
      I called upon them.

 The friend was a man about thirty years old. He bore an enormous head on a
      child's body—a body without chest or shoulders. An immense forehead,
      which seemed to have engulfed the rest of the man, expanded like a dome
      above a thin face which ended in a little pointed beard. Two sharp eyes
      and a peculiar mouth gave one the impression of the head of a reptile,
      while the magnificent brow suggested a genius.

 A nervous twitching shook this peculiar being, who walked, moved, acted by
      jerks like a broken spring.

 This was Algernon Charles Swinburne, son of an English admiral and
      grandson, on the maternal side, of the Earl of Ashburnham.

 He strange countenance was transfigured when he spoke. I have seldom seen
      a man more impressive, more eloquent, incisive or charming in
      conversation. His rapid, clear, piercing and fantastic imagination seemed
      to creep into his voice and to lend life to his words. His brusque
      gestures enlivened his speech, which penetrated one like a dagger, and he
      had bursts of thought, just as lighthouses throw out flashes of fire,
      great, genial lights that seemed to illuminate a whole world of ideas.

 The home of the two friends was pretty and by no means commonplace.
      Everywhere were paintings, some superb, some strange, representing
      different conceptions of insanity. Unless I am mistaken, there was a
      water-color which represented the head of a dead man floating in a
      rose-colored shell on a boundless ocean, under a moon with a human face.

 Here and there I came across bones. I clearly remember a flayed hand on
      which was hanging some dried skin and black muscles, and on the snow-white
      bones could be seen the traces of dried blood.

 The food was a riddle which I could not solve. Was it good? Was it bad? I
      could not say. Some roast monkey took away all desire to make a steady
      diet of this animal, and the great monkey who roamed about among us at
      large and playfully pushed his head into my glass when I wished to drink
      cured me of any desire I might have to take one of his brothers as a
      companion for the rest of my days.

 As for the two men, they gave me the impression of two strange, original,
      remarkable minds, belonging to that peculiar race of talented madmen from
      among whom have arisen Poe, Hoffmann and many others.

 If genius is, as is commonly believed, a sort of aberration of great
      minds, then Algernon Charles Swinburne is undoubtedly a genius.

 Great minds that are healthy are never considered geniuses, while this
      sublime qualification is lavished on brains that are often inferior but
      are slightly touched by madness.

 At any rate, this poet remains one of the first of his time, through his
      originality and polished form. He is an exalted lyrical singer who seldom
      bothers about the good and humble truth, which French poets are now
      seeking so persistently and patiently. He strives to set down dreams,
      subtle thoughts, sometimes great, sometimes visibly forced, but sometimes
      magnificent.

 Two years later I found the house closed and its tenants gone. The
      furniture was being sold. In memory of them I bought the hideous flayed
      hand. On the grass an enormous square block of granite bore this simple
      word: “Nip.” Above this a hollow stone offered water to the
      birds. It was the grave of the monkey, who had been hanged by a young,
      vindictive negro servant. It was said that this violent domestic had been
      forced to flee at the point of his exasperated master's revolver. After
      wandering about without home or food for several days, he returned and
      began to peddle barley-sugar in the streets. He was expelled from the
      country after he had almost strangled a displeased customer.

 The world would be gayer if one could often meet homes like that.

 This story appeared in the “Gaulois,” November 29, 1882. It was the
   original sketch for the introductory study of Swinburne, written by
   Maupassant for the French translation by Gabriel Mourey of “Poems
   and Ballads.”