THE PENGUINS' ROCK
    

      This is the season for penguins.
    

      From April to the end of May, before the Parisian visitors arrive, one
      sees, all at once, on the little beach at Etretat several old gentlemen,
      booted and belted in shooting costume. They spend four or five days at the
      Hotel Hauville, disappear, and return again three weeks later. Then, after
      a fresh sojourn, they go away altogether.
    

      One sees them again the following spring.
    

      These are the last penguin hunters, what remain of the old set. There were
      about twenty enthusiasts thirty or forty years ago; now there are only a
      few of the enthusiastic sportsmen.
    

      The penguin is a very rare bird of passage, with peculiar habits. It lives
      the greater part of the year in the latitude of Newfoundland and the
      islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon. But in the breeding season a flight of
      emigrants crosses the ocean and comes every year to the same spot to lay
      their eggs, to the Penguins' Rock near Etretat. They are found nowhere
      else, only there. They have always come there, have always been chased
      away, but return again, and will always return. As soon as the young birds
      are grown they all fly away, and disappear for a year.
    

      Why do they not go elsewhere? Why not choose some other spot on the long
      white, unending cliff that extends from the Pas-de-Calais to Havre? What
      force, what invincible instinct, what custom of centuries impels these
      birds to come back to this place? What first migration, what tempest,
      possibly, once cast their ancestors on this rock? And why do the children,
      the grandchildren, all the descendants of the first parents always return
      here?
    

      There are not many of them, a hundred at most, as if one single family,
      maintaining the tradition, made this annual pilgrimage.
    

      And each spring, as soon as the little wandering tribe has taken up its
      abode an the rock, the same sportsmen also reappear in the village. One
      knew them formerly when they were young; now they are old, but constant to
      the regular appointment which they have kept for thirty or forty years.
      They would not miss it for anything in the world.
    

      It was an April evening in one of the later years. Three of the old
      sportsmen had arrived; one was missing—M. d'Arnelles.
    

      He had written to no one, given no account of himself. But he was not
      dead, like so many of the rest; they would have heard of it. At length,
      tired of waiting for him, the other three sat down to table. Dinner was
      almost over when a carriage drove into the yard of the hotel, and the late
      corner presently entered the dining room.
    

      He sat down, in a good humor, rubbing his hands, and ate with zest. When
      one of his comrades remarked with surprise at his being in a frock-coat,
      he replied quietly:
    

      “Yes, I had no time to change my clothes.”
    

      They retired on leaving the table, for they had to set out before daybreak
      in order to take the birds unawares.
    

      There is nothing so pretty as this sport, this early morning expedition.
    

      At three o'clock in the morning the sailors awoke the sportsmen by
      throwing sand against the windows. They were ready in a few minutes and
      went down to the beach. Although it was still dark, the stars had paled a
      little. The sea ground the shingle on the beach. There was such a fresh
      breeze that it made one shiver slightly in spite of one's heavy clothing.
    

      Presently two boats were pushed down the beach, by the sailors, with a
      sound as of tearing cloth, and were floated on the nearest waves. The
      brown sail was hoisted, swelled a little, fluttered, hesitated and
      swelling out again as round as a paunch, carried the boats towards the
      large arched entrance that could be faintly distinguished in the darkness.
    

      The sky became clearer, the shadows seemed to melt away. The coast still
      seemed veiled, the great white coast, perpendicular as a wall.
    

      They passed through the Manne-Porte, an enormous arch beneath which a ship
      could sail; they doubled the promontory of La Courtine, passed the little
      valley of Antifer and the cape of the same name; and suddenly caught sight
      of a beach on which some hundreds of seagulls were perched.
    

      That was the Penguins' Rock. It was just a little protuberance of the
      cliff, and on the narrow ledges of rock the birds' heads might be seen
      watching the boats.
    

      They remained there, motionless, not venturing to fly off as yet. Some of
      them perched on the edges, seated upright, looked almost like bottles, for
      their little legs are so short that when they walk they glide along as if
      they were on rollers. When they start to fly they cannot make a spring and
      let themselves fall like stones almost down to the very men who are
      watching them.
    

      They know their limitation and the danger to which it subjects them, and
      cannot make up their minds to fly away.
    

      But the boatmen begin to shout, beating the sides of the boat with the
      wooden boat pins, and the birds, in affright, fly one by one into space
      until they reach the level of the waves. Then, moving their wings rapidly,
      they scud, scud along until they reach the open sea; if a shower of lead
      does not knock them into the water.
    

      For an hour the firing is kept up, obliging them to give up, one after
      another. Sometimes the mother birds will not leave their nests, and are
      riddled with shot, causing drops of blood to spurt out on the white cliff,
      and the animal dies without having deserted her eggs.
    

      The first day M. d'Arnelles fired at the birds with his habitual zeal; but
      when the party returned toward ten o'clock, beneath a brilliant sun, which
      cast great triangles of light on the white cliffs along the coast he
      appeared a little worried, and absentminded, contrary to his accustomed
      manner.
    

      As soon as they got on shore a kind of servant dressed in black came up to
      him and said something in a low tone. He seemed to reflect, hesitate, and
      then replied:
    

      “No, to-morrow.”
    

      The following day they set out again. This time M, d'Arnelles frequently
      missed his aim, although the birds were close by. His friends teased him,
      asked him if he were in love, if some secret sorrow was troubling his mind
      and heart. At length he confessed.
    

      “Yes, indeed, I have to leave soon, and that annoys me.”
    

      “What, you must leave? And why?”
    

      “Oh, I have some business that calls me back. I cannot stay any
      longer.”
    

      They then talked of other matters.
    

      As soon as breakfast was over the valet in black appeared. M. d'Arnelles
      ordered his carriage, and the man was leaving the room when the three
      sportsmen interfered, insisting, begging, and praying their friend to
      stay. One of them at last said:
    

      “Come now, this cannot be a matter of such importance, for you have
      already waited two days.”
    

      M. d'Arnelles, altogether perplexed, began to think, evidently baffled,
      divided between pleasure and duty, unhappy and disturbed.
    

      After reflecting for some time he stammered:
    

      “The fact is—the fact is—I am not alone here. I have my
      son-in-law.”
    

      There were exclamations and shouts of “Your son-in-law! Where is he?”
    

      He suddenly appeared confused and his face grew red.
    

      “What! do you not know? Why—why—he is in the coach
      house. He is dead.”
    

      They were all silent in amazement.
    

      M. d'Arnelles continued, more and more disturbed:
    

      “I had the misfortune to lose him; and as I was taking the body to
      my house, in Briseville, I came round this way so as not to miss our
      appointment. But you can see that I cannot wait any longer.”
    

      Then one of the sportsmen, bolder than the rest said:
    

      “Well, but—since he is dead—it seems to me that he can
      wait a day longer.”
    

      The others chimed in:
    

      “That cannot be denied.”
    

      M. d'Arnelles appeared to be relieved of a great weight, but a little
      uneasy, nevertheless, he asked:
    

      “But, frankly—do you think—”
    

      The three others, as one man, replied:
    

      “Parbleu! my dear boy, two days more or less can make no difference
      in his present condition.”
    

      And, perfectly calmly, the father-in-law turned to the undertaker's
      assistant, and said:
    

      “Well, then, my friend, it will be the day after tomorrow.”
    







      A FAMILY
    

      I was to see my old friend, Simon Radevin, of whom I had lost sight for
      fifteen years. At one time he was my most intimate friend, the friend who
      knows one's thoughts, with whom one passes long, quiet, happy evenings, to
      whom one tells one's secret love affairs, and who seems to draw out those
      rare, ingenious, delicate thoughts born of that sympathy that gives a
      sense of repose.
    

      For years we had scarcely been separated; we had lived, travelled, thought
      and dreamed together; had liked the same things, had admired the same
      books, understood the same authors, trembled with the same sensations, and
      very often laughed at the same individuals, whom we understood completely
      by merely exchanging a glance.
    

      Then he married. He married, quite suddenly, a little girl from the
      provinces, who had come to Paris in search of a husband. How in the world
      could that little thin, insipidly fair girl, with her weak hands, her
      light, vacant eyes, and her clear, silly voice, who was exactly like a
      hundred thousand marriageable dolls, have picked up that intelligent,
      clever young fellow? Can any one understand these things? No doubt he had
      hoped for happiness, simple, quiet and long-enduring happiness, in the
      arms of a good, tender and faithful woman; he had seen all that in the
      transparent looks of that schoolgirl with light hair.
    

      He had not dreamed of the fact that an active, living and vibrating man
      grows weary of everything as soon as he understands the stupid reality,
      unless, indeed, he becomes so brutalized that he understands nothing
      whatever.
    

      What would he be like when I met him again? Still lively, witty,
      light-hearted and enthusiastic, or in a state of mental torpor induced by
      provincial life? A man may change greatly in the course of fifteen years!
    

      The train stopped at a small station, and as I got out of the carriage, a
      stout, a very stout man with red cheeks and a big stomach rushed up to me
      with open arms, exclaiming: “George!” I embraced him, but I
      had not recognized him, and then I said, in astonishment: “By Jove!
      You have not grown thin!” And he replied with a laugh:
    

      “What did you expect? Good living, a good table and good nights!
      Eating and sleeping, that is my existence!”
    

      I looked at him closely, trying to discover in that broad face the
      features I held so dear. His eyes alone had not changed, but I no longer
      saw the same expression in them, and I said to myself: “If the
      expression be the reflection of the mind, the thoughts in that head are
      not what they used to be formerly; those thoughts which I knew so well.”
    

      Yet his eyes were bright, full of happiness and friendship, but they had
      not that clear, intelligent expression which shows as much as words the
      brightness of the intellect. Suddenly he said:
    

      “Here are my two eldest children.” A girl of fourteen, who was
      almost a woman, and a boy of thirteen, in the dress of a boy from a Lycee,
      came forward in a hesitating and awkward manner, and I said in a low
      voice: “Are they yours?” “Of course they are,” he
      replied, laughing. “How many have you?” “Five! There are
      three more at home.”
    

      He said this in a proud, self-satisfied, almost triumphant manner, and I
      felt profound pity, mingled with a feeling of vague contempt, for this
      vainglorious and simple reproducer of his species.
    

      I got into a carriage which he drove himself, and we set off through the
      town, a dull, sleepy, gloomy town where nothing was moving in the streets
      except a few dogs and two or three maidservants. Here and there a
      shopkeeper, standing at his door, took off his hat, and Simon returned his
      salute and told me the man's name; no doubt to show me that he knew all
      the inhabitants personally, and the thought struck me that he was thinking
      of becoming a candidate for the Chamber of Deputies, that dream of all
      those who bury themselves in the provinces.
    

      We were soon out of the town, and the carriage turned into a garden that
      was an imitation of a park, and stopped in front of a turreted house,
      which tried to look like a chateau.
    

      “That is my den,” said Simon, so that I might compliment him
      on it. “It is charming,” I replied.
    

      A lady appeared on the steps, dressed for company, and with company
      phrases all ready prepared. She was no longer the light-haired, insipid
      girl I had seen in church fifteen years previously, but a stout lady in
      curls and flounces, one of those ladies of uncertain age, without
      intellect, without any of those things that go to make a woman. In short,
      she was a mother, a stout, commonplace mother, a human breeding machine
      which procreates without any other preoccupation but her children and her
      cook-book.
    

      She welcomed me, and I went into the hall, where three children, ranged
      according to their height, seemed set out for review, like firemen before
      a mayor, and I said: “Ah! ah! so there are the others?” Simon,
      radiant with pleasure, introduced them: “Jean, Sophie and Gontran.”
    

      The door of the drawing-room was open. I went in, and in the depths of an
      easy-chair, I saw something trembling, a man, an old, paralyzed man.
      Madame Radevin came forward and said: “This is my grandfather,
      monsieur; he is eighty-seven.” And then she shouted into the shaking
      old man's ears: “This is a friend of Simon's, papa.” The old
      gentleman tried to say “good-day” to me, and he muttered:
      “Oua, oua, oua,” and waved his hand, and I took a seat saying:
      “You are very kind, monsieur.”
    

      Simon had just come in, and he said with a laugh: “So! You have made
      grandpapa's acquaintance. He is a treasure, that old man; he is the
      delight of the children. But he is so greedy that he almost kills himself
      at every meal; you have no idea what he would eat if he were allowed to do
      as he pleased. But you will see, you will see. He looks at all the sweets
      as if they were so many girls. You never saw anything so funny; you will
      see presently.”
    

      I was then shown to my room, to change my dress for dinner, and hearing a
      great clatter behind me on the stairs, I turned round and saw that all the
      children were following me behind their father; to do me honor, no doubt.
    

      My windows looked out across a dreary, interminable plain, an ocean of
      grass, of wheat and of oats, without a clump of trees or any rising
      ground, a striking and melancholy picture of the life which they must be
      leading in that house.
    

      A bell rang; it was for dinner, and I went downstairs. Madame Radevin took
      my arm in a ceremonious manner, and we passed into the dining-room. A
      footman wheeled in the old man in his armchair. He gave a greedy and
      curious look at the dessert, as he turned his shaking head with difficulty
      from one dish to the other.
    

      Simon rubbed his hands: “You will be amused,” he said; and all
      the children understanding that I was going to be indulged with the sight
      of their greedy grandfather, began to laugh, while their mother merely
      smiled and shrugged her shoulders, and Simon, making a speaking trumpet of
      his hands, shouted at the old man: “This evening there is sweet
      creamed rice!” The wrinkled face of the grandfather brightened, and
      he trembled more violently, from head to foot, showing that he had
      understood and was very pleased. The dinner began.
    

      “Just look!” Simon whispered. The old man did not like the
      soup, and refused to eat it; but he was obliged to do it for the good of
      his health, and the footman forced the spoon into his mouth, while the old
      man blew so energetically, so as not to swallow the soup, that it was
      scattered like a spray all over the table and over his neighbors. The
      children writhed with laughter at the spectacle, while their father, who
      was also amused, said: “Is not the old man comical?”
    

      During the whole meal they were taken up solely with him. He devoured the
      dishes on the table with his eyes, and tried to seize them and pull them
      over to him with his trembling hands. They put them almost within his
      reach, to see his useless efforts, his trembling clutches at them, the
      piteous appeal of his whole nature, of his eyes, of his mouth and of his
      nose as he smelt them, and he slobbered on his table napkin with
      eagerness, while uttering inarticulate grunts. And the whole family was
      highly amused at this horrible and grotesque scene.
    

      Then they put a tiny morsel on his plate, and he ate with feverish
      gluttony, in order to get something more as soon as possible, and when the
      sweetened rice was brought in, he nearly had a fit, and groaned with
      greediness, and Gontran called out to him:
    

      “You have eaten too much already; you can have no more.” And
      they pretended not to give him any. Then he began to cry; he cried and
      trembled more violently than ever, while all the children laughed. At
      last, however, they gave him his helping, a very small piece; and as he
      ate the first mouthful, he made a comical noise in his throat, and a
      movement with his neck as ducks do when they swallow too large a morsel,
      and when he had swallowed it, he began to stamp his feet, so as to get
      more.
    

      I was seized with pity for this saddening and ridiculous Tantalus, and
      interposed on his behalf:
    

      “Come, give him a little more rice!” But Simon replied:
      “Oh! no, my dear fellow, if he were to eat too much, it would harm
      him, at his age.”
    

      I held my tongue, and thought over those words. Oh, ethics! Oh, logic! Oh,
      wisdom! At his age! So they deprived him of his only remaining pleasure
      out of regard for his health! His health! What would he do with it, inert
      and trembling wreck that he was? They were taking care of his life, so
      they said. His life? How many days? Ten, twenty, fifty, or a hundred? Why?
      For his own sake? Or to preserve for some time longer the spectacle of his
      impotent greediness in the family.
    

      There was nothing left for him to do in this life, nothing whatever. He
      had one single wish left, one sole pleasure; why not grant him that last
      solace until he died?
    

      After we had played cards for a long time, I went up to my room and to
      bed; I was low-spirited and sad, sad, sad! and I sat at my window. Not a
      sound could be heard outside but the beautiful warbling of a bird in a
      tree, somewhere in the distance. No doubt the bird was singing in a low
      voice during the night, to lull his mate, who was asleep on her eggs. And
      I thought of my poor friend's five children, and pictured him to myself,
      snoring by the side of his ugly wife.