THE BELL-TOWER

 In the south of Europe, nigh a once frescoed
capital, now with dank mould cankering its
bloom, central in a plain, stands what, at distance,
seems the black mossed stump of some
immeasurable pine, fallen, in forgotten days,
with Anak and the Titan.

 As all along where the pine tree falls, its
dissolution leaves a mossy mound—last-flung
shadow of the perished trunk; never lengthening,
never lessening; unsubject to the fleet
falsities of the sun; shade immutable, and true
gauge which cometh by prostration—so westward
from what seems the stump, one steadfast
spear of lichened ruin veins the plain.

 From that tree-top, what birded chimes of
silver throats had rung. A stone pine; a metallic
aviary in its crown: the Bell-Tower,
built by the great mechanician, the unblest
foundling, Bannadonna.

 Like Babel's, its base was laid in a high hour
of renovated earth, following the second deluge, [pg 402]

 when the waters of the Dark Ages had dried
up, and once more the green appeared. No
wonder that, after so long and deep submersion,
the jubilant expectation of the race should, as
with Noah's sons, soar into Shinar aspiration.

 In firm resolve, no man in Europe at that
period went beyond Bannadonna. Enriched
through commerce with the Levant, the state
in which he lived voted to have the noblest
Bell-Tower in Italy. His repute assigned him
to be architect.

 Stone by stone, month by month, the tower
rose. Higher, higher; snail-like in pace, but
torch or rocket in its pride.

 After the masons would depart, the builder,
standing alone upon its ever-ascending summit,
at close of every day, saw that he overtopped
still higher walls and trees. He would tarry
till a late hour there, wrapped in schemes of
other and still loftier piles. Those who of saints'
days thronged the spot—hanging to the rude
poles of scaffolding, like sailors on yards, or
bees on boughs, unmindful of lime and dust,
and falling chips of stone—their homage not
the less inspirited him to self-esteem. [pg 403]

  At length the holiday of the Tower came.
To the sound of viols, the climax-stone slowly
rose in air, and, amid the firing of ordnance,
was laid by Bannadonna's hands upon the final
course. Then mounting it, he stood erect,
alone, with folded arms, gazing upon the white
summits of blue inland Alps, and whiter crests
of bluer Alps off-shore—sights invisible from
the plain. Invisible, too, from thence was that
eye he turned below, when, like the cannon
booms, came up to him the people's combustions
of applause.

 That which stirred them so was, seeing with
what serenity the builder stood three hundred
feet in air, upon an unrailed perch. This none
but he durst do. But his periodic standing
upon the pile, in each stage of its growth—such
discipline had its last result.

 Little remained now but the bells. These,
in all respects, must correspond with their receptacle.

 The minor ones were prosperously cast. A
highly enriched one followed, of a singular
make, intended for suspension in a manner before
unknown. The purpose of this bell, its [pg 404]

 rotary motion, and connection with the clock-work,
also executed at the time, will, in the sequel,
receive mention.

 In the one erection, bell-tower and clock-tower
were united, though, before that period,
such structures had commonly been built distinct;
as the Campanile and Torre del 'Orologio
of St. Mark to this day attest.

 But it was upon the great state-bell that the
founder lavished his more daring skill. In vain
did some of the less elated magistrates here
caution him; saying that though truly the
tower was Titanic, yet limit should be set to
the dependent weight of its swaying masses.
But undeterred, he prepared his mammoth
mould, dented with mythological devices; kindled
his fires of balsamic firs; melted his tin
and copper, and, throwing in much plate, contributed
by the public spirit of the nobles, let
loose the tide.

 The unleashed metals bayed like hounds.
The workmen shrunk. Through their fright,
fatal harm to the bell was dreaded. Fearless
as Shadrach, Bannadonna, rushing through the
glow, smote the chief culprit with his ponderous [pg 405]

 ladle. From the smitten part, a splinter was
dashed into the seething mass, and at once was
melted in.

 Next day a portion of the work was heedfully
uncovered. All seemed right. Upon the
third morning, with equal satisfaction, it was
bared still lower. At length, like some old
Theban king, the whole cooled casting was disinterred.
All was fair except in one strange
spot. But as he suffered no one to attend him
in these inspections, he concealed the blemish
by some preparation which none knew better
to devise.

 The casting of such a mass was deemed no
small triumph for the caster; one, too, in which
the state might not scorn to share. The homicide
was overlooked. By the charitable that
deed was but imputed to sudden transports of
esthetic passion, not to any flagitious quality.
A kick from an Arabian charger; not sign of
vice, but blood.

 His felony remitted by the judge, absolution
given him by the priest, what more could even
a sickly conscience have desired.

 Honoring the tower and its builder with [pg 406]

 another holiday, the republic witnessed the
hoisting of the bells and clock-work amid
shows and pomps superior to the former.

 Some months of more than usual solitude on
Bannadonna's part ensued. It was not unknown
that he was engaged upon something for the
belfry, intended to complete it, and surpass all
that had gone before. Most people imagined
that the design would involve a casting like the
bells. But those who thought they had some
further insight, would shake their heads, with
hints, that not for nothing did the mechanician
keep so secret. Meantime, his seclusion failed
not to invest his work with more or less of that
sort of mystery pertaining to the forbidden.

 Ere long he had a heavy object hoisted to the
belfry, wrapped in a dark sack or cloak—a procedure
sometimes had in the case of an elaborate
piece of sculpture, or statue, which, being intended
to grace the front of a new edifice, the
architect does not desire exposed to critical
eyes, till set up, finished, in its appointed place.
Such was the impression now. But, as the
object rose, a statuary present observed, or
thought he did, that it was not entirely rigid, [pg 407]

 but was, in a manner, pliant. At last, when
the hidden thing had attained its final height,
and, obscurely seen from below, seemed almost
of itself to step into the belfry, as if with little
assistance from the crane, a shrewd old blacksmith
present ventured the suspicion that it
was but a living man. This surmise was thought
a foolish one, while the general interest failed
not to augment.

 Not without demur from Bannadonna, the
chief-magistrate of the town, with an associate—both
elderly men—followed what seemed
the image up the tower. But, arrived at the
belfry, they had little recompense. Plausibly
entrenching himself behind the conceded mysteries
of his art, the mechanician withheld
present explanation. The magistrates glanced
toward the cloaked object, which, to their
surprise, seemed now to have changed its attitude,
or else had before been more perplexingly
concealed by the violent muffling action of the
wind without. It seemed now seated upon
some sort of frame, or chair, contained within
the domino. They observed that nigh the top,
in a sort of square, the web of the cloth, either [pg 408]

 from accident or design, had its warp partly
withdrawn, and the cross threads plucked out
here and there, so as to form a sort of woven
grating. Whether it were the low wind or no,
stealing through the stone lattice-work, or only
their own perturbed imaginations, is uncertain,
but they thought they discerned a slight sort
of fitful, spring-like motion, in the domino.
Nothing, however incidental or insignificant,
escaped their uneasy eyes. Among other things,
they pried out, in a corner, an earthen cup,
partly corroded and partly encrusted, and one
whispered to the other, that this cup was just
such a one as might, in mockery, be offered to
the lips of some brazen statue, or, perhaps, still
worse.

 But, being questioned, the mechanician said,
that the cup was simply used in his founder's
business, and described the purpose; in short,
a cup to test the condition of metals in fusion.
He added, that it had got into the belfry by
the merest chance.

 Again, and again, they gazed at the domino,
as at some suspicious incognito at a Venetian
mask. All sorts of vague apprehensions stirred [pg 409]

 them. They even dreaded lest, when they
should descend, the mechanician, though without
a flesh and blood companion, for all that,
would not be left alone.

 Affecting some merriment at their disquietude,
he begged to relieve them, by extending a coarse
sheet of workman's canvas between them and
the object.

 Meantime he sought to interest them in his
other work; nor, now that the domino was out
of sight, did they long remain insensible to the
artistic wonders lying round them; wonders
hitherto beheld but in their unfinished state;
because, since hoisting the bells, none but the
caster had entered within the belfry. It was
one trait of his, that, even in details, he would
not let another do what he could, without too
great loss of time, accomplish for himself. So,
for several preceding weeks, whatever hours
were unemployed in his secret design, had been
devoted to elaborating the figures on the bells.

 The clock-bell, in particular, now drew attention.
Under a patient chisel, the latent beauty
of its enrichments, before obscured by the cloudings
incident to casting, that beauty in its shyest [pg 410]

 grace, was now revealed. Round and round
the bell, twelve figures of gay girls, garlanded,
hand-in-hand, danced in a choral ring—the embodied
hours.

 "Bannadonna," said the chief, "this bell excels
all else. No added touch could here improve.
Hark!" hearing a sound, "was that
the wind?"

 "The wind, Excellenza," was the light response.
"But the figures, they are not yet without
their faults. They need some touches yet.
When those are given, and the—block yonder,"
pointing towards the canvas screen,
"when Haman there, as I merrily call him,—him? it

, I mean—when Haman is fixed on
this, his lofty tree, then, gentlemen, will I be
most happy to receive you here again."

 The equivocal reference to the object caused
some return of restlessness. However, on their
part, the visitors forbore further allusion to it,
unwilling, perhaps, to let the foundling see how
easily it lay within his plebeian art to stir the
placid dignity of nobles.

 "Well, Bannadonna," said the chief, "how
long ere you are ready to set the clock going, [pg 411]

 so that the hour shall be sounded? Our interest
in you, not less than in the work itself, makes
us anxious to be assured of your success. The
people, too,—why, they are shouting now. Say
the exact hour when you will be ready."

 "To-morrow, Excellenza, if you listen for it,—or
should you not, all the same—strange
music will be heard. The stroke of one shall
be the first from yonder bell," pointing to the
bell adorned with girls and garlands, "that
stroke shall fall there, where the hand of Una
clasps Dua's. The stroke of one shall sever
that loved clasp. To-morrow, then, at one
o'clock, as struck here, precisely here," advancing
and placing his finger upon the clasp, "the
poor mechanic will be most happy once more
to give you liege audience, in this his littered
shop. Farewell till then, illustrious magnificoes,
and hark ye for your vassal's stroke."

 His still, Vulcanic face hiding its burning
brightness like a forge, he moved with ostentatious
deference towards the scuttle, as if so far
to escort their exit. But the junior magistrate,
a kind-hearted man, troubled at what seemed
to him a certain sardonical disdain, lurking beneath [pg 412]

 the foundling's humble mien, and in
Christian sympathy more distressed at it on his
account than on his own, dimly surmising what
might be the final fate of such a cynic solitaire,
nor perhaps uninfluenced by the general strangeness
of surrounding things, this good magistrate
had glanced sadly, sideways from the speaker,
and thereupon his foreboding eye had started
at the expression of the unchanging face of the
Hour Una.

 "How is this, Bannadonna?" he lowly asked,
"Una looks unlike her sisters."

 "In Christ's name, Bannadonna," impulsively
broke in the chief, his attention, for the first
attracted to the figure, by his associate's remark,
"Una's face looks just like that of Deborah, the
prophetess, as painted by the Florentine, Del
Fonca."

 "Surely, Bannadonna," lowly resumed the
milder magistrate, "you meant the twelve
should wear the same jocundly abandoned air.
But see, the smile of Una seems but a fatal one.
'Tis different."

 While his mild associate was speaking, the
chief glanced, inquiringly, from him to the caster, [pg 413]

 as if anxious to mark how the discrepancy
would be accounted for. As the chief stood,
his advanced foot was on the scuttle's curb.

 Bannadonna spoke:

 "Excellenza, now that, following your keener
eye, I glance upon the face of Una, I do, indeed
perceive some little variance. But look all
round the bell, and you will find no two faces
entirely correspond. Because there is a law in
art—but the cold wind is rising more; these
lattices are but a poor defense. Suffer me,
magnificoes, to conduct you, at least, partly on
your way. Those in whose well-being there is
a public stake, should be heedfully attended."

 "Touching the look of Una, you were saying,
Bannadonna, that there was a certain law
in art," observed the chief, as the three now
descended the stone shaft, "pray, tell me,
then—."

 "Pardon; another time, Excellenza;—the
tower is damp."

 "Nay, I must rest, and hear it now. Here,—here
is a wide landing, and through this leeward
slit, no wind, but ample light. Tell us of
your law; and at large." [pg 414]

  "Since, Excellenza, you insist, know that
there is a law in art, which bars the possibility
of duplicates. Some years ago, you may remember,
I graved a small seal for your republic,
bearing, for its chief device, the head of your
own ancestor, its illustrious founder. It becoming
necessary, for the customs' use, to have
innumerable impressions for bales and boxes, I
graved an entire plate, containing one hundred
of the seals. Now, though, indeed, my object
was to have those hundred heads identical, and
though, I dare say, people think them; so, yet,
upon closely scanning an uncut impression from
the plate, no two of those five-score faces, side
by side, will be found alike. Gravity is the air
of all; but, diversified in all. In some, benevolent;
in some, ambiguous; in two or three, to
a close scrutiny, all but incipiently malign, the
variation of less than a hair's breadth in the
linear shadings round the mouth sufficing to all
this. Now, Excellenza, transmute that general
gravity into joyousness, and subject it to twelve
of those variations I have described, and tell
me, will you not have my hours here, and Una
one of them? But I like—." [pg 415]

  Hark! is that—a footfall above?

 "Mortar, Excellenza; sometimes it drops to
the belfry-floor from the arch where the stonework
was left undressed. I must have it seen
to. As I was about to say: for one, I like this
law forbidding duplicates. It evokes fine personalities.
Yes, Excellenza, that strange, and—to
you—uncertain smile, and those fore-looking
eyes of Una, suit Bannadonna very well."

 "Hark!—sure we left no soul above?"

 "No soul, Excellenza; rest assured, no soul

—Again
the mortar."

 "It fell not while we were there."

 "Ah, in your presence, it better knew its
place, Excellenza," blandly bowed Bannadonna.

 "But, Una," said the milder magistrate, "she
seemed intently gazing on you; one would
have almost sworn that she picked you out
from among us three."

 "If she did, possibly, it might have been her
finer apprehension, Excellenza."

 "How, Bannadonna? I do not understand
you."

 "No consequence, no consequence, Excellenza—but
the shifted wind is blowing through the [pg 416]

 slit. Suffer me to escort you on; and then,
pardon, but the toiler must to his tools."

 "It may be foolish, Signor," said the milder
magistrate, as, from the third landing, the two
now went down unescorted, "but, somehow,
our great mechanician moves me strangely.
Why, just now, when he so superciliously replied,
his walk seemed Sisera's, God's vain foe,
in Del Fonca's painting. And that young,
sculptured Deborah, too. Ay, and that—."

 "Tush, tush, Signor!" returned the chief.
"A passing whim. Deborah?—Where's Jael,
pray?"

 "Ah," said the other, as they now stepped
upon the sod, "Ah, Signor, I see you leave
your fears behind you with the chill and gloom;
but mine, even in this sunny air, remain,
Hark!"

 It was a sound from just within the tower
door, whence they had emerged. Turning,
they saw it closed.

 "He has slipped down and barred us out,"
smiled the chief; "but it is his custom."

 Proclamation was now made, that the next
day, at one hour after meridian, the clock [pg 417]

 would strike, and—thanks to the mechanician's
powerful art—with unusual accompaniments.
But what those should be, none as yet could
say. The announcement was received with
cheers.

 By the looser sort, who encamped about the
tower all night, lights were seen gleaming
through the topmost blind-work, only disappearing
with the morning sun. Strange sounds,
too, were heard, or were thought to be, by
those whom anxious watching might not have
left mentally undisturbed—sounds, not only of
some ringing implement, but also—so they
said—half-suppressed screams and plainings,
such as might have issued from some ghostly
engine, overplied.

 Slowly the day drew on; part of the concourse
chasing the weary time with songs and
games, till, at last, the great blurred sun rolled,
like a football, against the plain.

 At noon, the nobility and principal citizens
came from the town in cavalcade, a guard of
soldiers, also, with music, the more to honor
the occasion.

 Only one hour more. Impatience grew. [pg 418]

 Watches were held in hands of feverish men,
who stood, now scrutinizing their small dial-plates,
and then, with neck thrown back,
gazing toward the belfry, as if the eye might
foretell that which could only be made sensible
to the ear; for, as yet, there was no dial to the
tower-clock.

 The hour hands of a thousand watches now
verged within a hair's breadth of the figure 1.
A silence, as of the expectation of some Shiloh,
pervaded the swarming plain. Suddenly a
dull, mangled sound—naught ringing in it;
scarcely audible, indeed, to the outer circles of
the people—that dull sound dropped heavily
from the belfry. At the same moment, each
man stared at his neighbor blankly. All
watches were upheld. All hour-hands were
at—had passed—the figure 1. No bell-stroke
from the tower. The multitude became tumultuous.

 Waiting a few moments, the chief magistrate,
commanding silence, hailed the belfry, to
know what thing unforeseen had happened
there.

 No response. [pg 419]

  He hailed again and yet again.

 All continued hushed.

 By his order, the soldiers burst in the tower-door;
when, stationing guards to defend it from
the now surging mob, the chief, accompanied
by his former associate, climbed the winding
stairs. Half-way up, they stopped to listen.
No sound. Mounting faster, they reached the
belfry; but, at the threshold, started at the
spectacle disclosed. A spaniel, which, unbeknown
to them, had followed them thus far,
stood shivering as before some unknown monster
in a brake: or, rather, as if it snuffed footsteps
leading to some other world.

 Bannadonna lay, prostrate and bleeding, at
the base of the bell which was adorned with
girls and garlands. He lay at the feet of the
hour Una; his head coinciding, in a vertical
line, with her left hand, clasped by the hour
Dua. With downcast face impending over
him, like Jael over nailed Sisera in the tent,
was the domino; now no more becloaked.

 It had limbs, and seemed clad in a scaly
mail, lustrous as a dragon-beetle's. It was
manacled, and its clubbed arms were uplifted, [pg 420]

 as if, with its manacles, once more to smite its
already smitten victim. One advanced foot of
it was inserted beneath the dead body, as if in
the act of spurning it.

 Uncertainty falls on what now followed.

 It were but natural to suppose that the
magistrates would, at first, shrink from immediate
personal contact with what they saw.
At the least, for a time, they would stand in
involuntary doubt; it may be, in more or less
of horrified alarm. Certain it is, that an arquebuss
was called for from below. And some
add, that its report, followed by a fierce whiz,
as of the sudden snapping of a main-spring,
with a steely din, as if a stack of sword-blades
should be dashed upon a pavement, these
blended sounds came ringing to the plain, attracting
every eye far upward to the belfry,
whence, through the lattice-work, thin wreaths
of smoke were curling.

 Some averred that it was the spaniel, gone
mad by fear, which was shot. This, others
denied. True it was, the spaniel never more
was seen; and, probably, for some unknown
reason, it shared the burial now to be related [pg 421]

 of the domino. For, whatever the preceding
circumstances may have been, the first instinctive
panic over, or else all ground of reasonable
fear removed, the two magistrates, by themselves,
quickly rehooded the figure in the
dropped cloak wherein it had been hoisted.
The same night, it was secretly lowered to the
ground, smuggled to the beach, pulled far out
to sea, and sunk. Nor to any after urgency,
even in free convivial hours, would the twain
ever disclose the full secrets of the belfry.

 From the mystery unavoidably investing it,
the popular solution of the foundling's fate
involved more or less of supernatural agency.
But some few less unscientific minds pretended
to find little difficulty in otherwise accounting
for it. In the chain of circumstantial inferences
drawn, there may, or may not, have
been some absent or defective links. But, as
the explanation in question is the only one
which tradition has explicitly preserved, in
dearth of better, it will here be given. But, in
the first place, it is requisite to present the
supposition entertained as to the entire motive
and mode, with their origin, of the secret design [pg 422]

 of Bannadonna; the minds above-mentioned
assuming to penetrate as well into his
soul as into the event. The disclosure will
indirectly involve reference to peculiar matters,
none of, the clearest, beyond the immediate
subject.

 At that period, no large bell was made to
sound otherwise than as at present, by agitation
of a tongue within, by means of ropes, or
percussion from without, either from cumbrous
machinery, or stalwart watchmen, armed with
heavy hammers, stationed in the belfry, or in
sentry-boxes on the open roof, according as the
bell was sheltered or exposed.

 It was from observing these exposed bells,
with their watchmen, that the foundling, as
was opined, derived the first suggestion of his
scheme. Perched on a great mast or spire, the
human figure, viewed from below, undergoes
such a reduction in its apparent size, as to
obliterate its intelligent features. It evinces
no personality. Instead of bespeaking volition,
its gestures rather resemble the automatic ones
of the arms of a telegraph.

 Musing, therefore, upon the purely Punchinello [pg 423]

 aspect of the human figure thus beheld, it
had indirectly occurred to Bannadonna to devise
some metallic agent, which should strike
the hour with its mechanic hand, with even
greater precision than the vital one. And,
moreover, as the vital watchman on the roof,
sallying from his retreat at the given periods,
walked to the bell with uplifted mace, to smite
it, Bannadonna had resolved that his invention
should likewise possess the power of locomotion,
and, along with that, the appearance, at
least, of intelligence and will.

 If the conjectures of those who claimed acquaintance
with the intent of Bannadonna be
thus far correct, no unenterprising spirit could
have been his. But they stopped not here;
intimating that though, indeed, his design had,
in the first place, been prompted by the sight
of the watchman, and confined to the devising
of a subtle substitute for him: yet, as is not
seldom the case with projectors, by insensible
gradations, proceeding from comparatively pigmy
aims to Titanic ones, the original scheme
had, in its anticipated eventualities, at last,
attained to an unheard of degree of daring. [pg 424]

  He still bent his efforts upon the locomotive
figure for the belfry, but only as a partial type
of an ulterior creature, a sort of elephantine
Helot, adapted to further, in a degree scarcely
to be imagined, the universal conveniences and
glories of humanity; supplying nothing less
than a supplement to the Six Days' Work;
stocking the earth with a new serf, more useful
than the ox, swifter than the dolphin, stronger
than the lion, more cunning than the ape, for
industry an ant, more fiery than serpents, and
yet, in patience, another ass. All excellences
of all God-made creatures, which served man,
were here to receive advancement, and then to
be combined in one. Talus was to have been
the all-accomplished Helot's name. Talus, iron
slave to Bannadonna, and, through him, to
man.

 Here, it might well be thought that, were
these last conjectures as to the foundling's
secrets not erroneous, then must he have been
hopelessly infected with the craziest chimeras
of his age; far outgoing Albert Magus and Cornelius
Agrippa. But the contrary was averred.
However marvelous his design, however apparently [pg 425]

 transcending not alone the bounds of
human invention, but those of divine creation,
yet the proposed means to be employed were
alleged to have been confined within the sober
forms of sober reason. It was affirmed that, to
a degree of more than skeptic scorn, Bannadonna
had been without sympathy for any of
the vain-glorious irrationalities of his time.
For example, he had not concluded, with the
visionaries among the metaphysicians, that between
the finer mechanic forces and the ruder
animal vitality some germ of correspondence
might prove discoverable. As little did his
scheme partake of the enthusiasm of some
natural philosophers, who hoped, by physiological
and chemical inductions, to arrive at a
knowledge of the source of life, and so qualify
themselves to manufacture and improve upon
it. Much less had he aught in common with
the tribe of alchemists, who sought, by a species
of incantations, to evoke some surprising
vitality from the laboratory. Neither had he
imagined, with certain sanguine theosophists,
that, by faithful adoration of the Highest, unheard-of
powers would be vouchsafed to man. [pg 426]

 A practical materialist, what Bannadonna had
aimed at was to have been reached, not by
logic, not by crucible, not by conjuration, not
by altars; but by plain vice-bench and hammer.
In short, to solve nature, to steal into her, to
intrigue beyond her, to procure some one else
to bind her to his hand;—these, one and all,
had not been his objects; but, asking no favors
from any element or any being, of himself,
to rival her, outstrip her, and rule her. He
stooped to conquer. With him, common sense
was theurgy; machinery, miracle; Prometheus,
the heroic name for machinist; man, the true
God.

 Nevertheless, in his initial step, so far as the
experimental automaton for the belfry was concerned,
he allowed fancy some little play; or,
perhaps, what seemed his fancifulness was but
his utilitarian ambition collaterally extended.
In figure, the creature for the belfry should not
be likened after the human pattern, nor any
animal one, nor after the ideals, however wild,
of ancient fable, but equally in aspect as in
organism be an original production; the more
terrible to behold, the better. [pg 427]

  Such, then, were the suppositions as to the
present scheme, and the reserved intent. How,
at the very threshold, so unlooked for a catastrophe
overturned all, or rather, what was the
conjecture here, is now to be set forth.

 It was thought that on the day preceding the
fatality, his visitors having left him, Bannadonna
had unpacked the belfry image, adjusted it, and
placed it in the retreat provided—a sort of
sentry-box in one corner of the belfry; in short,
throughout the night, and for some part of the
ensuing morning, he had been engaged in arranging
everything connected with the domino;
the issuing from the sentry-box each sixty
minutes; sliding along a grooved way, like a
railway; advancing to the clock-bell, with uplifted
manacles; striking it at one of the twelve
junctions of the four-and-twenty hands; then
wheeling, circling the bell, and retiring to its
post, there to bide for another sixty minutes,
when the same process was to be repeated; the
bell, by a cunning mechanism, meantime turning
on its vertical axis, so as to present, to the
descending mace, the clasped hands of the next
two figures, when it would strike two, three, [pg 428]

 and so on, to the end. The musical metal in
this time-bell being so managed in the fusion,
by some art, perishing with its originator, that
each of the clasps of the four-and-twenty hands
should give forth its own peculiar resonance
when parted.

 But on the magic metal, the magic and metallic
stranger never struck but that one stroke,
drove but that one nail, served but that one
clasp, by which Bannadonna clung to his ambitious
life. For, after winding up the creature
in the sentry-box, so that, for the present,
skipping the intervening hours, it should not
emerge till the hour of one, but should then
infallibly emerge, and, after deftly oiling the
grooves whereon it was to slide, it was surmised
that the mechanician must then have hurried to
the bell, to give his final touches to its sculpture.
True artist, he here became absorbed; and absorption
still further intensified, it may be, by
his striving to abate that strange look of Una;
which, though, before others, he had treated
with such unconcern, might not, in secret, have
been without its thorn.

 And so, for the interval, he was oblivious of [pg 429]

 his creature; which, not oblivious of him, and
true to its creation, and true to its heedful
winding up, left its post precisely at the given
moment; along its well-oiled route, slid noiselessly
towards its mark; and, aiming at the
hand of Una, to ring one clangorous note, dully
smote the intervening brain of Bannadonna,
turned backwards to it; the manacled arms
then instantly up-springing to their hovering
poise. The falling body clogged the thing's
return; so there it stood, still impending over
Bannadonna, as if whispering some post-mortem
terror. The chisel lay dropped from the hand,
but beside the hand; the oil-flask spilled across
the iron track.

 In his unhappy end, not unmindful of the
rare genius of the mechanician, the republic
decreed him a stately funeral. It was resolved
that the great bell—the one whose casting had
been jeopardized through the timidity of the
ill-starred workman—should be rung upon the
entrance of the bier into the cathedral. The
most robust man of the country round was
assigned the office of bell-ringer.

 But as the pall-bearers entered the cathedral [pg 430]

 porch, naught but a broken and disastrous sound,
like that of some lone Alpine land-slide, fell
from the tower upon their ears. And then, all
was hushed.

 Glancing backwards, they saw the groined
belfry crashed sideways in. It afterwards appeared
that the powerful peasant, who had the
bell-rope in charge, wishing to test at once
the full glory of the bell, had swayed down
upon the rope with one concentrate jerk.
The mass of quaking metal, too ponderous for
its frame, and strangely feeble somewhere at its
top, loosed from its fastening, tore sideways
down, and tumbling in one sheer fall, three
hundred feet to the soft sward below, buried
itself inverted and half out of sight.

 Upon its disinterment, the main fracture was
found to have started from a small spot in the
ear; which, being scraped, revealed a defect,
deceptively minute in the casting; which defect
must subsequently have been pasted over
with some unknown compound.

 The remolten metal soon reassumed its place
in the tower's repaired superstructure. For
one year the metallic choir of birds sang musically [pg 431]

 in its belfry-bough-work of sculptured
blinds and traceries. But on the first anniversary
of the tower's completion—at early dawn,
before the concourse had surrounded it—an
earthquake came; one loud crash was heard.
The stone-pine, with all its bower of songsters,
lay overthrown upon the plain.

 So the blind slave obeyed its blinder lord;
but, in obedience, slew him. So the creator
was killed by the creature. So the bell was
too heavy for the tower. So the bell's main
weakness was where man's blood had flawed
it. And so pride went before the fall.





   Notes

 The American Spaniards have long been in the habit
of making presents of islands to deserving individuals. The
pilot Juan Fernandez procured a deed of the isle named after
him, and for some years resided there before Selkirk came.
It is supposed, however, that he eventually contracted the
blues upon his princely property, for after a time he returned
to the main, and as report goes, became a very garrulous
barber in the city of Lima.





 

  ***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIAZZA TALES***

 ******* This file should be named 15859-h.txt or 15859-h.zip *******

 This and all associated files of various formats will be found in: 

  Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

 Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

 *** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at .


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility: This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks: *** END: FULL LICENSE ***