THE PIECE OF STRING

 It was market-day, and from all the country round Goderville the peasants
      and their wives were coming toward the town. The men walked slowly,
      throwing the whole body forward at every step of their long, crooked legs.
      They were deformed from pushing the plough which makes the left-shoulder
      higher, and bends their figures side-ways; from reaping the grain, when
      they have to spread their legs so as to keep on their feet. Their starched
      blue blouses, glossy as though varnished, ornamented at collar and cuffs
      with a little embroidered design and blown out around their bony bodies,
      looked very much like balloons about to soar, whence issued two arms and
      two feet.

 Some of these fellows dragged a cow or a calf at the end of a rope. And
      just behind the animal followed their wives beating it over the back with
      a leaf-covered branch to hasten its pace, and carrying large baskets out
      of which protruded the heads of chickens or ducks. These women walked more
      quickly and energetically than the men, with their erect, dried-up
      figures, adorned with scanty little shawls pinned over their flat bosoms,
      and their heads wrapped round with a white cloth, enclosing the hair and
      surmounted by a cap.

 Now a char-a-banc passed by, jogging along behind a nag and shaking up
      strangely the two men on the seat, and the woman at the bottom of the cart
      who held fast to its sides to lessen the hard jolting.

 In the market-place at Goderville was a great crowd, a mingled multitude
      of men and beasts. The horns of cattle, the high, long-napped hats of
      wealthy peasants, the head-dresses of the women came to the surface of
      that sea. And the sharp, shrill, barking voices made a continuous, wild
      din, while above it occasionally rose a huge burst of laughter from the
      sturdy lungs of a merry peasant or a prolonged bellow from a cow tied fast
      to the wall of a house.

 It all smelled of the stable, of milk, of hay and of perspiration, giving
      off that half-human, half-animal odor which is peculiar to country folks.

 Maitre Hauchecorne, of Breaute, had just arrived at Goderville and was
      making his way toward the square when he perceived on the ground a little
      piece of string. Maitre Hauchecorne, economical as are all true Normans,
      reflected that everything was worth picking up which could be of any use,
      and he stooped down, but painfully, because he suffered from rheumatism.
      He took the bit of thin string from the ground and was carefully preparing
      to roll it up when he saw Maitre Malandain, the harness maker, on his
      doorstep staring at him. They had once had a quarrel about a halter, and
      they had borne each other malice ever since. Maitre Hauchecorne was
      overcome with a sort of shame at being seen by his enemy picking up a bit
      of string in the road. He quickly hid it beneath his blouse and then
      slipped it into his breeches, pocket, then pretended to be still looking
      for something on the ground which he did not discover and finally went off
      toward the market-place, his head bent forward and his body almost doubled
      in two by rheumatic pains.

 He was at once lost in the crowd, which kept moving about slowly and
      noisily as it chaffered and bargained. The peasants examined the cows,
      went off, came back, always in doubt for fear of being cheated, never
      quite daring to decide, looking the seller square in the eye in the effort
      to discover the tricks of the man and the defect in the beast.

 The women, having placed their great baskets at their feet, had taken out
      the poultry, which lay upon the ground, their legs tied together, with
      terrified eyes and scarlet combs.

 They listened to propositions, maintaining their prices in a decided
      manner with an impassive face or perhaps deciding to accept the smaller
      price offered, suddenly calling out to the customer who was starting to go
      away:

 “All right, I'll let you have them, Mait' Anthime.”

 Then, little by little, the square became empty, and when the Angelus
      struck midday those who lived at a distance poured into the inns.

 At Jourdain's the great room was filled with eaters, just as the vast
      court was filled with vehicles of every sort—wagons, gigs,
      chars-a-bancs, tilburies, innumerable vehicles which have no name, yellow
      with mud, misshapen, pieced together, raising their shafts to heaven like
      two arms, or it may be with their nose on the ground and their rear in the
      air.

 Just opposite to where the diners were at table the huge fireplace, with
      its bright flame, gave out a burning heat on the backs of those who sat at
      the right. Three spits were turning, loaded with chickens, with pigeons
      and with joints of mutton, and a delectable odor of roast meat and of
      gravy flowing over crisp brown skin arose from the hearth, kindled
      merriment, caused mouths to water.

 All the aristocracy of the plough were eating there at Mait' Jourdain's,
      the innkeeper's, a dealer in horses also and a sharp fellow who had made a
      great deal of money in his day.

 The dishes were passed round, were emptied, as were the jugs of yellow
      cider. Every one told of his affairs, of his purchases and his sales. They
      exchanged news about the crops. The weather was good for greens, but too
      wet for grain.

 Suddenly the drum began to beat in the courtyard before the house. Every
      one, except some of the most indifferent, was on their feet at once and
      ran to the door, to the windows, their mouths full and napkins in their
      hand.

 When the public crier had finished his tattoo he called forth in a jerky
      voice, pausing in the wrong places:

 “Be it known to the inhabitants of Goderville and in general to all
      persons present at the market that there has been lost this morning on the
      Beuzeville road, between nine and ten o'clock, a black leather pocketbook
      containing five hundred francs and business papers. You are requested to
      return it to the mayor's office at once or to Maitre Fortune Houlbreque,
      of Manneville. There will be twenty francs reward.”

 Then the man went away. They heard once more at a distance the dull
      beating of the drum and the faint voice of the crier. Then they all began
      to talk of this incident, reckoning up the chances which Maitre Houlbreque
      had of finding or of not finding his pocketbook again.

 The meal went on. They were finishing their coffee when the corporal of
      gendarmes appeared on the threshold.

 He asked:

 “Is Maitre Hauchecorne, of Breaute, here?”

 Maitre Hauchecorne, seated at the other end of the table answered:

 “Here I am, here I am.”

 And he followed the corporal.

 The mayor was waiting for him, seated in an armchair. He was the notary of
      the place, a tall, grave man of pompous speech.

 “Maitre Hauchecorne,” said he, “this morning on the
      Beuzeville road, you were seen to pick up the pocketbook lost by Maitre
      Houlbreque, of Manneville.”

 The countryman looked at the mayor in amazement frightened already at this
      suspicion which rested on him, he knew not why.

 “I—I picked up that pocketbook?”

 “Yes, YOU.”

 “I swear I don't even know anything about it.”

 “You were seen.”

 “I was seen—I? Who saw me?”

 “M. Malandain, the harness-maker.”

 Then the old man remembered, understood, and, reddening with anger, said:

 “Ah! he saw me, did he, the rascal? He saw me picking up this string
      here, M'sieu le Maire.”

 And fumbling at the bottom of his pocket, he pulled out of it the little
      end of string.

 But the mayor incredulously shook his head:

 “You will not make me believe, Maitre Hauchecorne, that M.
      Malandain, who is a man whose word can be relied on, has mistaken this
      string for a pocketbook.”

 The peasant, furious, raised his hand and spat on the ground beside him as
      if to attest his good faith, repeating:

 “For all that, it is God's truth, M'sieu le Maire. There! On my
      soul's salvation, I repeat it.”

 The mayor continued:

 “After you picked up the object in question, you even looked about
      for some time in the mud to see if a piece of money had not dropped out of
      it.”

 The good man was choking with indignation and fear.

 “How can they tell—how can they tell such lies as that to
      slander an honest man! How can they?”

 His protestations were in vain; he was not believed.

 He was confronted with M. Malandain, who repeated and sustained his
      testimony. They railed at one another for an hour. At his own request
      Maitre Hauchecorne was searched. Nothing was found on him.

 At last the mayor, much perplexed, sent him away, warning him that he
      would inform the public prosecutor and ask for orders.

 The news had spread. When he left the mayor's office the old man was
      surrounded, interrogated with a curiosity which was serious or mocking, as
      the case might be, but into which no indignation entered. And he began to
      tell the story of the string. They did not believe him. They laughed.

 He passed on, buttonholed by every one, himself buttonholing his
      acquaintances, beginning over and over again his tale and his
      protestations, showing his pockets turned inside out to prove that he had
      nothing in them.

 They said to him:

 “You old rogue!”

 He grew more and more angry, feverish, in despair at not being believed,
      and kept on telling his story.

 The night came. It was time to go home. He left with three of his
      neighbors, to whom he pointed out the place where he had picked up the
      string, and all the way he talked of his adventure.

 That evening he made the round of the village of Breaute for the purpose
      of telling every one. He met only unbelievers.

 He brooded over it all night long.

 The next day, about one in the afternoon, Marius Paumelle, a farm hand of
      Maitre Breton, the market gardener at Ymauville, returned the pocketbook
      and its contents to Maitre Holbreque, of Manneville.

 This man said, indeed, that he had found it on the road, but not knowing
      how to read, he had carried it home and given it to his master.

 The news spread to the environs. Maitre Hauchecorne was informed. He
      started off at once and began to relate his story with the denoument. He
      was triumphant.

 “What grieved me,” said he, “was not the thing itself,
      do you understand, but it was being accused of lying. Nothing does you so
      much harm as being in disgrace for lying.”

 All day he talked of his adventure. He told it on the roads to the people
      who passed, at the cabaret to the people who drank and next Sunday when
      they came out of church. He even stopped strangers to tell them about it.
      He was easy now, and yet something worried him without his knowing exactly
      what it was. People had a joking manner while they listened. They did not
      seem convinced. He seemed to feel their remarks behind his back.

 On Tuesday of the following week he went to market at Goderville, prompted
      solely by the need of telling his story.

 Malandain, standing on his doorstep, began to laugh as he saw him pass.
      Why?

 He accosted a farmer of Criquetot, who did not let him finish, and giving
      him a punch in the pit of the stomach cried in his face: “Oh, you
      great rogue!” Then he turned his heel upon him.

 Maitre Hauchecorne remained speechless and grew more and more uneasy. Why
      had they called him “great rogue”?

 When seated at table in Jourdain's tavern he began again to explain the
      whole affair.

 A horse dealer of Montivilliers shouted at him:

 “Get out, get out, you old scamp! I know all about your old string.”

 Hauchecorne stammered:

 “But since they found it again, the pocketbook!”

 But the other continued:

 “Hold your tongue, daddy; there's one who finds it and there's
      another who returns it. And no one the wiser.”

 The farmer was speechless. He understood at last. They accused him of
      having had the pocketbook brought back by an accomplice, by a confederate.

 He tried to protest. The whole table began to laugh.

 He could not finish his dinner, and went away amid a chorus of jeers.

 He went home indignant, choking with rage, with confusion, the more cast
      down since with his Norman craftiness he was, perhaps, capable of having
      done what they accused him of and even of boasting of it as a good trick.
      He was dimly conscious that it was impossible to prove his innocence, his
      craftiness being so well known. He felt himself struck to the heart by the
      injustice of the suspicion.

 He began anew to tell his tale, lengthening his recital every day, each
      day adding new proofs, more energetic declarations and more sacred oaths,
      which he thought of, which he prepared in his hours of solitude, for his
      mind was entirely occupied with the story of the string. The more he
      denied it, the more artful his arguments, the less he was believed.

 “Those are liars proofs,” they said behind his back.

 He felt this. It preyed upon him and he exhausted himself in useless
      efforts.

 He was visibly wasting away.

 Jokers would make him tell the story of “the piece of string”
      to amuse them, just as you make a soldier who has been on a campaign tell
      his story of the battle. His mind kept growing weaker and about the end of
      December he took to his bed.

 He passed away early in January, and, in the ravings of death agony, he
      protested his innocence, repeating:

 “A little bit of string—a little bit of string. See, here it
      is, M'sieu le Maire.”

  

  









 ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 9.

 GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others

  

  









 VOLUME IX.