THE CURIOUS BOOK

 COMPLETE

 (The foregoing review of the great work of G. Ragsdale McClintock is
      liberally illuminated with sample extracts, but these cannot appease the
      appetite. Only the complete book, unabridged, can do that. Therefore it is
      here printed.—M.T.)

 THE ENEMY CONQUERED; OR, LOVE TRIUMPHANT

 Sweet girl, thy smiles are full of charms,

     Thy voice is sweeter still,

     It fills the breast with fond alarms,

     Echoed by every rill.

 I begin this little work with an eulogy upon woman, who has ever been
      distinguished for her perseverance, her constancy, and her devoted
      attention to those upon whom she has been pleased to place her affections .
      Many have been the themes upon which writers and public speakers have
      dwelt with intense and increasing interest. Among these delightful themes
      stands that of woman, the balm to all our sighs and disappointments, and
      the most pre-eminent of all other topics. Here the poet and orator have
      stood and gazed with wonder and with admiration; they have dwelt upon her
      innocence, the ornament of all her virtues. First viewing her external
      charms, such as set forth in her form and benevolent countenance, and then
      passing to the deep hidden springs of loveliness and disinterested
      devotion. In every clime, and in every age, she has been the pride of her nation . Her watchfulness is untiring; she who guarded the sepulcher
      was the first to approach it, and the last to depart from its awful yet
      sublime scene. Even here, in this highly favored land, we look to her for
      the security of our institutions, and for our future greatness as a
      nation. But, strange as it may appear, woman's charms and virtues are but
      slightly appreciated by thousands. Those who should raise the standard of
      female worth, and paint her value with her virtues, in living colors, upon
      the banners that are fanned by the zephyrs of heaven, and hand them down
      to posterity as emblematical of a rich inheritance, do not properly
      estimate them.

 Man is not sensible, at all times, of the nature and the emotions which
      bear that name; he does not understand, he will not comprehend; his
      intelligence has not expanded to that degree of glory which drinks in the
      vast revolution of humanity, its end, its mighty destination, and the
      causes which operated, and are still operating, to produce a more elevated
      station, and the objects which energize and enliven its consummation. This
      he is a stranger to; he is not aware that woman is the recipient of
      celestial love, and that man is dependent upon her to perfect his
      character; that without her, philosophically and truly speaking, the
      brightest of his intelligence is but the coldness of a winter moon, whose
      beams can produce no fruit, whose solar light is not its own, but borrowed
      from the great dispenser of effulgent beauty. We have no disposition in
      the world to flatter the fair sex, we would raise them above those
      dastardly principles which only exist in little souls, contracted hearts,
      and a distracted brain. Often does she unfold herself in all her
      fascinating loveliness, presenting the most captivating charms; yet we
      find man frequently treats such purity of purpose with indifference. Why
      does he do it? Why does he baffle that which is inevitably the source of
      his better days? Is he so much of a stranger to those excellent qualities
      as not to appreciate woman, as not to have respect to her dignity? Since
      her art and beauty first captivated man, she has been his delight and his
      comfort; she has shared alike in his misfortunes and in his prosperity.

 Whenever the billows of adversity and the tumultuous waves of trouble beat
      high, her smiles subdue their fury. Should the tear of sorrow and the
      mournful sigh of grief interrupt the peace of his mind, her voice removes
      them all, and she bends from her circle to encourage him onward. When
      darkness would obscure his mind, and a thick cloud of gloom would bewilder
      its operations, her intelligent eye darts a ray of streaming light into
      his heart. Mighty and charming is that disinterested devotion which she is
      ever ready to exercise toward man, not waiting till the last moment of his
      danger, but seeks to relieve him in his early afflictions. It gushes forth
      from the expansive fullness of a tender and devoted heart, where the
      noblest, the purest, and the most elevated and refined feelings are
      matured and developed in those many kind offices which invariably make her
      character.

 In the room of sorrow and sickness, this unequaled characteristic may
      always been seen, in the performance of the most charitable acts; nothing
      that she can do to promote the happiness of him who she claims to be her
      protector will be omitted; all is invigorated by the animating sunbeams
      which awaken the heart to songs of gaiety. Leaving this point, to notice
      another prominent consideration, which is generally one of great moment
      and of vital importance. Invariably she is firm and steady in all her
      pursuits and aims. There is required a combination of forces and extreme
      opposition to drive her from her position; she takes her stand, not to be
      moved by the sound of Apollo's lyre or the curved bow of pleasure.

 Firm and true to what she undertakes, and that which she requires by her
      own aggrandizement, and regards as being within the strict rules of
      propriety, she will remain stable and unflinching to the last. A more
      genuine principle is not to be found in the most determined, resolute
      heart of man. For this she deserves to be held in the highest
      commendation, for this she deserves the purest of all other blessings, and
      for this she deserves the most laudable reward of all others. It is a
      noble characteristic and is worthy of imitation of any age. And when we
      look at it in one particular aspect, it is still magnified, and grows
      brighter and brighter the more we reflect upon its eternal duration. What
      will she not do, when her word as well as her affections and love are
      pledged to her lover? Everything that is dear to her on earth, all the
      hospitalities of kind and loving parents, all the sincerity and loveliness
      of sisters, and the benevolent devotion of brothers, who have surrounded
      her with every comfort; she will forsake them all, quit the harmony and
      sweet sound of the lute and the harp, and throw herself upon the
      affections of some devoted admirer, in whom she fondly hopes to find more
      than she has left behind, which is not often realized by many. Truth and
      virtue all combined! How deserving our admiration and love! Ah cruel would
      it be in man, after she has thus manifested such an unshaken confidence in
      him, and said by her determination to abandon all the endearments and
      blandishments of home, to act a villainous part, and prove a traitor in
      the revolution of his mission, and then turn Hector over the innocent
      victim whom he swore to protect, in the presence of Heaven, recorded by
      the pen of an angel.

 Striking as this trait may unfold itself in her character, and as
      pre-eminent as it may stand among the fair display of her other qualities,
      yet there is another, which struggles into existence, and adds an
      additional luster to what she already possesses. I mean that disposition
      in woman which enables her, in sorrow, in grief, and in distress, to bear
      all with enduring patience. This she has done, and can and will do, amid
      the din of war and clash of arms. Scenes and occurrences which, to every
      appearance, are calculated to rend the heart with the profoundest emotions
      of trouble, do not fetter that exalted principle imbued in her very
      nature. It is true, her tender and feeling heart may often be moved (as
      she is thus constituted), but she is not conquered, she has not given up
      to the harlequin of disappointments, her energies have not become clouded
      in the last movement of misfortune, but she is continually invigorated by
      the archetype of her affections. She may bury her face in her hands, and
      let the tear of anguish roll, she may promenade the delightful walks of
      some garden, decorated with all the flowers of nature, or she may steal
      out along some gently rippling stream, and there, as the silver waters
      uninterruptedly move forward, shed her silent tears; they mingle with the
      waves, and take a last farewell of their agitated home, to seek a peaceful
      dwelling among the rolling floods; yet there is a voice rushing from her
      breast, that proclaims victory along the whole line and battlement
      of her affections. That voice is the voice of patience and resignation;
      that voice is one that bears everything calmly and dispassionately, amid
      the most distressing scenes; when the fates are arrayed against her peace,
      and apparently plotting for her destruction, still she is resigned.

 Woman's affections are deep, consequently her troubles may be made to sink
      deep. Although you may not be able to mark the traces of her grief and the
      furrowings of her anguish upon her winning countenance, yet be assured
      they are nevertheless preying upon her inward person, sapping the very
      foundation of that heart which alone was made for the weal and not the woe
      of man. The deep recesses of the soul are fields for their operation. But
      they are not destined simply to take the regions of the heart for their
      dominion, they are not satisfied merely with interrupting her better
      feelings; but after a while you may see the blooming cheek beginning to
      droop and fade, her intelligent eye no longer sparkles with the starry
      light of heaven, her vibrating pulse long since changed its regular
      motion, and her palpitating bosom beats once more for the midday of her
      glory. Anxiety and care ultimately throw her into the arms of the haggard
      and grim monster death. But, oh, how patient, under every pining
      influence! Let us view the matter in bolder colors; see her when the
      dearest object of her affections recklessly seeks every bacchanalian
      pleasure, contents himself with the last rubbish of creation. With what
      solicitude she awaits his return! Sleep fails to perform its office—she
      weeps while the nocturnal shades of the night triumph in the stillness.
      Bending over some favorite book, whilst the author throws before her mind
      the most beautiful imagery, she startles at every sound. The midnight
      silence is broken by the solemn announcement of the return of another
      morning. He is still absent; she listens for that voice which has so often
      been greeted by the melodies of her own; but, alas! stern silence is all
      that she receives for her vigilance.

 Mark her unwearied watchfulness, as the night passes away. At last,
      brutalized by the accursed thing, he staggers along with rage, and,
      shivering with cold, he makes his appearance. Not a murmur is heard from
      her lips. On the contrary, she meets him with a smile—she caresses
      him with tender arms, with all the gentleness and softness of her sex.
      Here, then, is seen her disposition, beautifully arrayed. Woman, thou art
      more to be admired than the spicy gales of Arabia, and more sought for
      than the gold of Golconda. We believe that Woman should associate freely
      with man, and we believe that it is for the preservation of her rights.
      She should become acquainted with the metaphysical designs of those who
      condescended to sing the siren song of flattery. This, we think, should be
      according to the unwritten law of decorum, which is stamped upon every
      innocent heart. The precepts of prudery are often steeped in the guilt of
      contamination, which blasts the expectations of better moments. Truth, and
      beautiful dreams—loveliness, and delicacy of character, with
      cherished affections of the ideal woman—gentle hopes and
      aspirations, are enough to uphold her in the storms of darkness, without
      the transferred colorings of a stained sufferer. How often have we seen it
      in our public prints, that woman occupies a false station in the world!
      and some have gone so far as to say it was an unnatural one. So long has
      she been regarded a weak creature, by the rabble and illiterate—they
      have looked upon her as an insufficient actress on the great stage of
      human life—a mere puppet, to fill up the drama of human existence—a
      thoughtless, inactive being—that she has too often come to the same
      conclusion herself, and has sometimes forgotten her high destination, in
      the meridian of her glory. We have but little sympathy or patience for
      those who treat her as a mere Rosy Melindi—who are always fishing
      for pretty complements—who are satisfied by the gossamer of Romance,
      and who can be allured by the verbosity of high-flown words, rich in
      language, but poor and barren in sentiment. Beset, as she has been, by the
      intellectual vulgar, the selfish, the designing, the cunning, the hidden,
      and the artful—no wonder she has sometimes folded her wings in
      despair, and forgotten her heavenly mission in the delirium of
      imagination; no wonder she searches out some wild desert, to find a
      peaceful home. But this cannot always continue. A new era is moving gently
      onward, old things are rapidly passing away; old superstitions, old
      prejudices, and old notions are now bidding farewell to their old
      associates and companions, and giving way to one whose wings are plumed
      with the light of heaven and tinged by the dews of the morning. There is a
      remnant of blessedness that clings to her in spite of all evil influence,
      there is enough of the Divine Master left to accomplish the noblest work
      ever achieved under the canopy of the vaulted skies; and that time is fast
      approaching, when the picture of the true woman will shine from its frame
      of glory, to captivate, to win back, to restore, and to call into being
      once more, the object of her mission .

 Star of the brave! thy glory shed,
     O'er all the earth, thy army led—
     Bold meteor of immortal birth!
     Why come from Heaven to dwell on Earth?

 Mighty and glorious are the days of youth; happy the moments of the lover ,
      mingled with smiles and tears of his devoted, and long to be remembered
      are the achievements which he gains with a palpitating heart and a
      trembling hand. A bright and lovely dawn, the harbinger of a fair and
      prosperous day, had arisen over the beautiful little village of Cumming,
      which is surrounded by the most romantic scenery in the Cherokee country.
      Brightening clouds seemed to rise from the mist of the fair Chattahoochee,
      to spread their beauty over the thick forest, to guide the hero whose
      bosom beats with aspirations to conquer the enemy that would tarnish his
      name, and to win back the admiration of his long-tried friend. He
      endeavored to make his way through Sawney's Mountain, where many meet to
      catch the gales that are continually blowing for the refreshment of the
      stranger and the traveler. Surrounded as he was by hills on every side,
      naked rocks dared the efforts of his energies. Soon the sky became
      overcast, the sun buried itself in the clouds, and the fair day gave place
      to gloomy twilight, which lay heavily on the Indian Plains. He remembered
      an old Indian Castle, that once stood at the foot of the mountain. He
      thought if he could make his way to this, he would rest contented for a
      short time. The mountain air breathed fragrance—a rosy tinge rested
      on the glassy waters that murmured at its base. His resolution soon
      brought him to the remains of the red man's hut: he surveyed with wonder
      and astonishment the decayed building, which time had buried in the dust,
      and thought to himself, his happiness was not yet complete. Beside the
      shore of the brook sat a young man, about eighteen or twenty, who seemed
      to be reading some favorite book, and who had a remarkably noble
      countenance—eyes which betrayed more than a common mind. This of
      course made the youth a welcome guest, and gained him friends in whatever
      condition of life he might be placed. The traveler observed that he was a
      well-built figure, which showed strength and grace in every movement. He
      accordingly addressed him in quite a gentlemanly manner, and inquired of
      him the way to the village. After he had received the desired information,
      and was about taking his leave, the youth said, “Are you not Major
      Elfonzo, the great musician—the champion of a noble cause—the
      modern Achilles, who gained so many victories in the Florida War?” “I bear
      that name,” said the Major, “and those titles, trusting at the same time
      that the ministers of grace will carry me triumphantly through all my
      laudable undertakings, and if,” continued the Major, “you, sir, are the
      patronizer of noble deeds, I should like to make you my confidant and
      learn your address.” The youth looked somewhat amazed, bowed low, mused
      for a moment, and began: “My name is Roswell. I have been recently
      admitted to the bar, and can only give a faint outline of my future
      success in that honorable profession; but I trust, sir, like the Eagle, I
      shall look down from lofty rocks upon the dwellings of man, and shall ever
      be ready to give you any assistance in my official capacity, and whatever
      this muscular arm of mine can do, whenever it shall be called from its
      buried greatness .” The Major grasped him by the hand, and
      exclaimed: “O! thou exalted spirit of inspiration—thou flame of
      burning prosperity, may the Heaven-directed blaze be the glare of thy
      soul, and battle down every rampart that seems to impede your progress!”

 The road which led to the town presented many attractions. Elfonzo had bid
      farewell to the youth of deep feeling, and was now wending his way to the
      dreaming spot of his fondness. The south winds whistled through the woods,
      as the waters dashed against the banks, as rapid fire in the pent furnace
      roars. This brought him to remember while alone, that he quietly left
      behind the hospitality of a father's house, and gladly entered the world,
      with higher hopes than are often realized. But as he journeyed onward, he
      was mindful of the advice of his father, who had often looked sadly on the
      ground when tears of cruelly deceived hope moistened his eye. Elfonzo had
      been somewhat of a dutiful son; yet fond of the amusements of life—had
      been in distant lands—had enjoyed the pleasure of the world and had
      frequently returned to the scenes of his boyhood, almost destitute of many
      of the comforts of life. In this condition, he would frequently say to his
      father, “Have I offended you, that you look upon me as a stranger, and
      frown upon me with stinging looks? Will you not favor me with the sound of
      your voice? If I have trampled upon your veneration, or have spread a
      humid veil of darkness around your expectations, send me back into the
      world where no heart beats for me—where the foot of man has never
      yet trod; but give me at least one kind word—allow me to come into
      the presence sometimes of thy winter-worn locks.” “Forbid it, Heaven, that
      I should be angry with thee,” answered the father, “my son, and yet I send
      thee back to the children of the world—to the cold charity of the
      combat, and to a land of victory. I read another destiny in thy
      countenance—I learn thy inclinations from the flame that has already
      kindled in my soul a strange sensation. It will seek thee, my dear Elfonzo ,
      it will find thee—thou canst not escape that lighted torch, which
      shall blot out from the remembrance of men a long train of prophecies
      which they have foretold against thee. I once thought not so. Once, I was
      blind; but now the path of life is plain before me, and my sight is clear;
      yet Elfonzo, return to thy worldly occupation—take again in thy hand
      that chord of sweet sounds—struggle with the civilized world, and
      with your own heart; fly swiftly to the enchanted ground—let the
      night-_owl_ send forth its screams from the stubborn oak—let the sea
      sport upon the beach, and the stars sing together; but learn of these,
      Elfonzo, thy doom, and thy hiding-place. Our most innocent as well as our
      most lawful desires must often be denied us, that we may learn to
      sacrifice them to a Higher will.”

 Remembering such admonitions with gratitude, Elfonzo was immediately urged
      by the recollection of his father's family to keep moving. His steps
      became quicker and quicker—he hastened through the piny woods,
      dark as the forest was, and with joy he very soon reached the little
      village of repose, in whose bosom rested the boldest chivalry. His close
      attention to every important object—his modest questions about
      whatever was new to him—his reverence for wise old age, and his
      ardent desire to learn many of the fine arts, soon brought him into
      respectable notice.

 One mild winter day as he walked along the streets toward the Academy,
      which stood upon a small eminence, surrounded by native growth—some
      venerable in its appearance, others young and prosperous—all seemed
      inviting, and seemed to be the very place for learning as well as for
      genius to spend its research beneath its spreading shades. He entered its
      classic walls in the usual mode of southern manners. The principal of the
      Institution begged him to be seated and listen to the recitations that
      were going on. He accordingly obeyed the request, and seemed to be much
      pleased. After the school was dismissed, and the young hearts regained
      their freedom, with the songs of the evening, laughing at the anticipated
      pleasures of a happy home, while others tittered at the actions of the
      past day, he addressed the teacher in a tone that indicated a resolution—with
      an undaunted mind. He said he had determined to become a student, if he
      could meet with his approbation. “Sir,” said he, “I have spent much time
      in the world. I have traveled among the uncivilized inhabitants of
      America. I have met with friends, and combated with foes; but none of
      these gratify my ambition, or decide what is to be my destiny. I see the
      learned would have an influence with the voice of the people themselves.
      The despoilers of the remotest kingdoms of the earth refer their
      differences to this class of persons. This the illiterate and
      inexperienced little dream of; and now if you will receive me as I am,
      with these deficiencies—with all my misguided opinions, I will give
      you my honor, sir, that I will never disgrace the Institution, or those
      who have placed you in this honorable station.” The instructor, who had
      met with many disappointments, knew how to feel for a stranger who had
      been thus turned upon the charities of an unfeeling community. He looked
      at him earnestly, and said: “Be of good cheer—look forward, sir, to
      the high destination you may attain. Remember, the more elevated the mark
      at which you aim, the more sure, the more glorious, the more magnificent
      the prize.” From wonder to wonder, his encouragement led the impatient
      listener. A strange nature bloomed before him—giant streams promised
      him success—gardens of hidden treasures opened to his view. All
      this, so vividly described, seemed to gain a new witchery from his glowing
      fancy.

 In 1842 he entered the class, and made rapid progress in the English and
      Latin departments. Indeed, he continued advancing with such rapidity that
      he was like to become the first in his class, and made such unexpected
      progress, and was so studious, that he had almost forgotten the pictured
      saint of his affections. The fresh wreaths of the pine and cypress had
      waited anxiously to drop once more the dews of Heavens upon the heads of
      those who had so often poured forth the tender emotions of their souls
      under its boughs. He was aware of the pleasure that he had seen there. So
      one evening, as he was returning from his reading, he concluded he would
      pay a visit to this enchanting spot. Little did he think of witnessing a
      shadow of his former happiness, though no doubt he wished it might be so.
      He continued sauntering by the roadside, meditating on the past. The
      nearer he approached the spot, the more anxious he became. At the moment a
      tall female figure flitted across his path, with a bunch of roses in her
      hand; her countenance showed uncommon vivacity, with a resolute spirit;
      her ivory teeth already appeared as she smiled beautifully, promenading—while
      her ringlets of hair dangled unconsciously around her snowy neck. Nothing
      was wanting to complete her beauty. The tinge of the rose was in full
      bloom upon her cheek; the charms of sensibility and tenderness were always
      her associates.. In Ambulinia's bosom dwelt a noble soul—one that
      never faded—one that never was conquered. Her heart yielded to no
      feeling but the love of Elfonzo, on whom she gazed with intense delight,
      and to whom she felt herself more closely bound, because he sought the
      hand of no other. Elfonzo was roused from his apparent reverie. His books
      no longer were his inseparable companions—his thoughts arrayed
      themselves to encourage him in the field of victory. He endeavored to
      speak to his supposed Ambulinia, but his speech appeared not in words. No,
      his effort was a stream of fire, that kindled his soul into a flame of
      admiration, and carried his senses away captive. Ambulinia had
      disappeared, to make him more mindful of his duty. As she walked speedily
      away through the piny woods she calmly echoed: “O! Elfonzo, thou wilt now
      look from thy sunbeams. Thou shalt now walk in a new path—perhaps
      thy way leads through darkness; but fear not, the stars foretell
      happiness.”

 Not many days afterward, as surrounded by fragrant flowers she sat one
      evening at twilight, to enjoy the cool breeze that whispered notes of
      melody along the distant groves, the little birds perched on every side,
      as if to watch the movements of their new visitor. The bells were tolling
      when Elfonzo silently stole along by the wild wood flowers, holding in his
      hand his favorite instrument of music—his eye continually searching
      for Ambulinia, who hardly seemed to perceive him, as she played carelessly
      with the songsters that hopped from branch to branch. Nothing could be
      more striking than the difference between the two. Nature seemed to have
      given the more tender soul to Elfonzo, and the stronger and more
      courageous to Ambulinia. A deep feeling spoke from the eyes of Elfonzo—such
      a feeling as can only be expressed by those who are blessed as admirers,
      and by those who are able to return the same with sincerity of heart. He
      was a few years older than Ambulinia: she had turned a little into her
      seventeenth. He had almost grown up in the Cherokee country, with the same
      equal proportions as one of the natives. But little intimacy had existed
      between them until the year forty-one—because the youth felt that
      the character of such a lovely girl was too exalted to inspire any other
      feeling than that of quiet reverence. But as lovers will not always be
      insulted, at all times and under all circumstances, by the frowns and cold
      looks of crabbed old age, which should continually reflect dignity upon
      those around, and treat unfortunate as well as the fortunate with a
      graceful mien, he continued to use diligence and perseverance. All this
      lighted a spark in his heart that changed his whole character, and like
      the unyielding Deity that follows the storm to check its rage in the
      forest, he resolves for the first time to shake off his embarrassment and
      return where he had before only worshiped.

 It could not escape Ambulinia's penetrating eye that he sought an
      interview with her, which she as anxiously avoided, and assumed a more
      distant calmness than before, seemingly to destroy all hope. After many
      efforts and struggles with his own person, with timid steps the Major
      approached the damsel, with the same caution as he would have done in a
      field of battle. “Lady Ambulinia,” said he, trembling, “I have long
      desired a moment like this. I dare not let it escape. I fear the
      consequences; yet I hope your indulgence will at least hear my petition.
      Can you not anticipate what I would say, and what I am about to express?
      Will not you, like Minerva, who sprung from the brain of Jupiter, release
      me from thy winding chains or cure me—” “Say no more, Elfonzo,”
       answered Ambulinia, with a serious look, raising her hand as if she
      intended to swear eternal hatred against the whole world; “another lady in
      my place would have perhaps answered your question in bitter coldness. I
      know not the little arts of my sex. I care but little for the vanity of
      those who would chide me, and am unwilling as well as shamed to be guilty
      of anything that would lead you to think 'all is not gold that glitters';
      so be not rash in your resolution. It is better to repent now than to do
      it in a more solemn hour. Yes, I know what you would say. I know you have
      a costly gift for me—the noblest that man can make— your
      heart! you should not offer it to one so unworthy. Heaven, you know,
      has allowed my father's house to be made a house of solitude, a home of
      silent obedience, which my parents say is more to be admired than big
      names and high-sounding titles. Notwithstanding all this, let me speak the
      emotions of an honest heart; allow me to say in the fullness of my hopes
      that I anticipate better days. The bird may stretch its wings toward the
      sun, which it can never reach; and flowers of the field appear to ascend
      in the same direction, because they cannot do otherwise; but man confides
      his complaints to the saints in whom he believes; for in their abodes of
      light they know no more sorrow. From your confession and indicative looks,
      I must be that person; if so, deceive not yourself.”

 Elfonzo replied, “Pardon me, my dear madam, for my frankness. I have loved
      you from my earliest days; everything grand and beautiful hath borne the
      image of Ambulinia; while precipices on every hand surrounded me, your guardian
      angel stood and beckoned me away from the deep abyss. In every trial,
      in every misfortune, I have met with your helping hand; yet I never
      dreamed or dared to cherish thy love till a voice impaired with age
      encouraged the cause, and declared they who acquired thy favor should win
      a victory. I saw how Leos worshipped thee. I felt my own unworthiness. I
      began to know jealousy —a strong guest, indeed, in my bosom—yet
      I could see if I gained your admiration Leos was to be my rival. I was
      aware that he had the influence of your parents, and the wealth of a
      deceased relative, which is too often mistaken for permanent and regular
      tranquillity; yet I have determined by your permission to beg an interest
      in your prayers—to ask you to animate my drooping spirits by your
      smiles and your winning looks; for if you but speak I shall be conqueror,
      my enemies shall stagger like Olympus shakes. And though earth and sea may
      tremble, and the charioteer of the sun may forget his dashing steed, yet I
      am assured that it is only to arm me with divine weapons which will enable
      me to complete my long-tried intention.”

 “Return to your self, Elfonzo,” said Ambulinia, pleasantly; “a dream of
      vision has disturbed your intellect; you are above the atmosphere,
      dwelling in the celestial regions; nothing is there that urges or hinders,
      nothing that brings discord into our present litigation. I entreat you to
      condescend a little, and be a man, and forget it all. When Homer describes
      the battle of the gods and noble men fighting with giants and dragons,
      they represent under this image our struggles with the delusions of our
      passions. You have exalted me, an unhappy girl, to the skies; you have
      called me a saint, and portrayed in your imagination an angel in human
      form. Let her remain such to you, let her continue to be as you have
      supposed, and be assured that she will consider a share in your esteem as
      her highest treasure. Think not that I would allure you from the path in
      which your conscience leads you; for you know I respect the conscience of
      others, as I would die for my own. Elfonzo, if I am worthy of thy love,
      let such conversation never again pass between us. Go, seek a nobler
      theme! we will seek it in the stream of time as the sun set in the
      Tigris.” As she spake these words she grasped the hand of Elfonzo, saying
      at the same time, “Peace and prosperity attend you, my hero: be up and
      doing!” Closing her remarks with this expression, she walked slowly away,
      leaving Elfonzo astonished and amazed. He ventured not to follow or detain
      her. Here he stood alone, gazing at the stars; confounded as he was, here
      he stood. The rippling stream rolled on at his feet. Twilight had already
      begun to draw her sable mantle over the earth, and now and then the fiery
      smoke would ascend from the little town which lay spread out before him.
      The citizens seemed to be full of life and good-humor; but poor Elfonzo
      saw not a brilliant scene. No; his future life stood before him, stripped
      of the hopes that once adorned all his sanguine desires. “Alas!” said he,
      “am I now Grief's disappointed son at last.” Ambulinia's image rose before
      his fancy. A mixture of ambition and greatness of soul moved upon his
      young heart, and encouraged him to bear all his crosses with the patience
      of a Job, notwithstanding he had to encounter with so many obstacles. He
      still endeavored to prosecute his studies, and reasonably progressed in
      his education. Still, he was not content; there was something yet to be
      done before his happiness was complete. He would visit his friends and
      acquaintances. They would invite him to social parties, insisting that he
      should partake of the amusements that were going on. This he enjoyed
      tolerably well. The ladies and gentlemen were generally well pleased with
      the Major; as he delighted all with his violin, which seemed to have a
      thousand chords—more symphonious than the Muses of Apollo and more
      enchanting than the ghost of the Hills. He passed some days in the
      country. During that time Leos had made many calls upon Ambulinia, who was
      generally received with a great deal of courtesy by the family. They
      thought him to be a young man worthy of attention, though he had but
      little in his soul to attract the attention or even win the affections of
      her whose graceful manners had almost made him a slave to every bewitching
      look that fell from her eyes. Leos made several attempts to tell her of
      his fair prospects—how much he loved her, and how much it would add
      to his bliss if he could but think she would be willing to share these
      blessings with him; but, choked by his undertaking, he made himself more
      like an inactive drone than he did like one who bowed at beauty's shrine.

 Elfonzo again wends his way to the stately walls and new-built village. He
      now determines to see the end of the prophesy which had been foretold to
      him. The clouds burst from his sight; he believes if he can but see his
      Ambulinia, he can open to her view the bloody altars that have been
      misrepresented to stigmatize his name. He knows that her breast is
      transfixed with the sword of reason, and ready at all times to detect the
      hidden villainy of her enemies. He resolves to see her in her own home,
      with the consoling theme: “'I can but perish if I go.' Let the
      consequences be what they may,” said he, “if I die, it shall be contending
      and struggling for my own rights.”

 Night had almost overtaken him when he arrived in town. Colonel Elder, a
      noble-hearted, high-minded, and independent man, met him at his door as
      usual, and seized him by the hand. “Well, Elfonzo,” said the Colonel, “how
      does the world use you in your efforts?” “I have no objection to the
      world,” said Elfonzo, “but the people are rather singular in some of their
      opinions.” “Aye, well,” said the Colonel, “you must remember that creation
      is made up of many mysteries; just take things by the right handle; be
      always sure you know which is the smooth side before you attempt your
      polish; be reconciled to your fate, be it what it may; and never find
      fault with your condition, unless your complaining will benefit it.
      Perseverance is a principle that should be commendable in those who have
      judgment to govern it. I should never have been so successful in my
      hunting excursions had I waited till the deer, by some magic dream, had
      been drawn to the muzzle of the gun before I made an attempt to fire at
      the game that dared my boldness in the wild forest. The great mystery in
      hunting seems to be—a good marksman, a resolute mind, a fixed
      determination, and my word for it, you will never return home without
      sounding your horn with the breath of a new victory. And so with every
      other undertaking. Be confident that your ammunition is of the right kind—always
      pull your trigger with a steady hand, and so soon as you perceive a calm,
      touch her off, and the spoils are yours.”

 This filled him with redoubled vigor, and he set out with a stronger
      anxiety than ever to the home of Ambulinia. A few short steps soon brought
      him to the door, half out of breath. He rapped gently. Ambulinia, who sat
      in the parlor alone, suspecting Elfonzo was near, ventured to the door,
      opened it, and beheld the hero, who stood in an humble attitude, bowed
      gracefully, and as they caught each other's looks the light of peace
      beamed from the eyes of Ambulinia. Elfonzo caught the expression; a halloo
      of smothered shouts ran through every vein, and for the first time he
      dared to impress a kiss upon her cheek. The scene was overwhelming; had
      the temptation been less animating, he would not have ventured to have
      acted so contrary to the desired wish of his Ambulinia; but who could have
      withstood the irrestistable temptation! What society condemns the practice
      but a cold, heartless, uncivilized people that know nothing of the warm
      attachments of refined society? Here the dead was raised to his
      long-cherished hopes, and the lost was found. Here all doubt and danger
      were buried in the vortex of oblivion; sectional differences no longer
      disunited their opinions; like the freed bird from the cage, sportive
      claps its rustling wings, wheels about to heaven in a joyful strain, and
      raises its notes to the upper sky. Ambulinia insisted upon Elfonzo to be
      seated, and give her a history of his unnecessary absence; assuring him
      the family had retired, consequently they would ever remain ignorant of
      his visit. Advancing toward him, she gave a bright display of her rosy
      neck, and from her head the ambrosial locks breathed divine fragrance; her
      robe hung waving to his view, while she stood like a goddess confessed
      before him.

 “It does seem to me, my dear sir,” said Ambulinia, “that you have been
      gone an age. Oh, the restless hours I have spent since I last saw you, in
      yon beautiful grove. There is where I trifled with your feelings for the
      express purpose of trying your attachment for me. I now find you are
      devoted; but ah! I trust you live not unguarded by the powers of Heaven.
      Though oft did I refuse to join my hand with thine, and as oft did I
      cruelly mock thy entreaties with borrowed shapes: yes, I feared to answer
      thee by terms, in words sincere and undissembled. O! could I pursue, and
      you have leisure to hear the annals of my woes, the evening star would
      shut Heaven's gates upon the impending day before my tale would be
      finished, and this night would find me soliciting your forgiveness.”

 “Dismiss thy fears and thy doubts,” replied Elfonzo.

 “Look, O! look: that angelic look of thine—bathe not thy visage in
      tears; banish those floods that are gathering; let my confession and my
      presence bring thee some relief.” “Then, indeed, I will be cheerful,” said
      Ambulinia, “and I think if we will go to the exhibition this evening, we
      certainly will see something worthy of our attention. One of the most
      tragical scenes is to be acted that has ever been witnessed, and one that
      every jealous-hearted person should learn a lesson from. It cannot fail to
      have a good effect, as it will be performed by those who are young and
      vigorous, and learned as well as enticing. You are aware, Major Elfonzo,
      who are to appear on the stage, and what the characters are to represent.”
       “I am acquainted with the circumstances,” replied Elfonzo, “and as I am to
      be one of the musicians upon that interesting occasion, I should be much
      gratified if you would favor me with your company during the hours of the
      exercises.”

 “What strange notions are in your mind?” inquired Ambulinia. “Now I know
      you have something in view, and I desire you to tell me why it is that you
      are so anxious that I should continue with you while the exercises are
      going on; though if you think I can add to your happiness and
      predilections, I have no particular objection to acquiesce in your
      request. Oh, I think I foresee, now, what you anticipate.” “And will you
      have the goodness to tell me what you think it will be?” inquired Elfonzo.
      “By all means,” answered Ambulinia; “a rival, sir, you would fancy in your
      own mind; but let me say for you, fear not! fear not! I will be one of the
      last persons to disgrace my sex by thus encouraging every one who may feel
      disposed to visit me, who may honor me with their graceful bows and their
      choicest compliments. It is true that young men too often mistake civil
      politeness for the finer emotions of the heart, which is tantamount to
      courtship; but, ah! how often are they deceived, when they come to test
      the weight of sunbeams with those on whose strength hangs the future
      happiness of an untried life.”

 The people were now rushing to the Academy with impatient anxiety; the
      band of music was closely followed by the students; then the parents and
      guardians; nothing interrupted the glow of spirits which ran through every
      bosom, tinged with the songs of a Virgil and the tide of a Homer. Elfonzo
      and Ambulinia soon repaired to the scene, and fortunately for them both
      the house was so crowded that they took their seats together in the music
      department, which was not in view of the auditory. This fortuitous
      circumstances added more the bliss of the Major than a thousand such
      exhibitions would have done. He forgot that he was man; music had lost its
      charms for him; whenever he attempted to carry his part, the string of the
      instrument would break, the bow became stubborn, and refused to obey the
      loud calls of the audience. Here, he said, was the paradise of his home,
      the long-sought-for opportunity; he felt as though he could send a million
      supplications to the throne of Heaven for such an exalted privilege. Poor
      Leos, who was somewhere in the crowd, looking as attentively as if he was
      searching for a needle in a haystack; here he stood, wondering to himself
      why Ambulinia was not there. “Where can she be? Oh! if she was only here,
      how I could relish the scene! Elfonzo is certainly not in town; but what
      if he is? I have got the wealth, if I have not the dignity, and I am sure
      that the squire and his lady have always been particular friends of mine,
      and I think with this assurance I shall be able to get upon the blind side
      of the rest of the family and make the heaven-born Ambulinia the mistress
      of all I possess.” Then, again, he would drop his head, as if attempting
      to solve the most difficult problem in Euclid. While he was thus
      conjecturing in his own mind, a very interesting part of the exhibition
      was going on, which called the attention of all present. The curtains of
      the stage waved continually by the repelled forces that were given to
      them, which caused Leos to behold Ambulinia leaning upon the chair of
      Elfonzo. Her lofty beauty, seen by the glimmering of the chandelier,
      filled his heart with rapture, he knew not how to contain himself; to go
      where they were would expose him to ridicule; to continue where he was,
      with such an object before him, without being allowed an explanation in
      that trying hour, would be to the great injury of his mental as well as of
      his physical powers; and, in the name of high heaven, what must he do?
      Finally, he resolved to contain himself as well as he conveniently could,
      until the scene was over, and then he would plant himself at the door, to
      arrest Ambulinia from the hands of the insolent Elfonzo, and thus make for
      himself a more prosperous field of immortality than ever was decreed by
      Omnipotence, or ever pencil drew or artist imagined. Accordingly he made
      himself sentinel, immediately after the performance of the evening—retained
      his position apparently in defiance of all the world; he waited, he gazed
      at every lady, his whole frame trembled; here he stood, until everything
      like human shape had disappeared from the institution, and he had done
      nothing; he had failed to accomplish that which he so eagerly sought for.
      Poor, unfortunate creature! he had not the eyes of an Argus, or he might
      have seen his Juno and Elfonzo, assisted by his friend Sigma, make their
      escape from the window, and, with the rapidity of a race-horse, hurry
      through the blast of the storm to the residence of her father, without
      being recognized. He did not tarry long, but assured Ambulinia the endless
      chain of their existence was more closely connected than ever, since he
      had seen the virtuous, innocent, imploring, and the constant Amelia
      murdered by the jealous-hearted Farcillo, the accursed of the land.

 The following is the tragical scene, which is only introduced to show the
      subject-matter that enabled Elfonzo to come to such a determinate
      resolution that nothing of the kind should ever dispossess him of his true
      character, should he be so fortunate as to succeed in his present
      undertaking.

 Amelia was the wife of Farcillo, and a virtuous woman; Gracia, a young
      lady, was her particular friend and confidant. Farcillo grew jealous of
      Amelia, murders her, finds out that he was deceived, and stabs himself .
      Amelia appears alone, talking to herself.

 A. Hail, ye solitary ruins of antiquity, ye sacred tombs and silent walks!
      it is your aid I invoke; it is to you, my soul, wrapt in deep mediation,
      pours forth its prayer. Here I wander upon the stage of mortality, since
      the world hath turned against me. Those whom I believed to be my friends,
      alas! are now my enemies, planting thorns in all my paths, poisoning all
      my pleasures, and turning the past to pain. What a lingering catalogue of
      sighs and tears lies just before me, crowding my aching bosom with the
      fleeting dream of humanity, which must shortly terminate. And to what
      purpose will all this bustle of life, these agitations and emotions of the
      heart have conduced, if it leave behind it nothing of utility, if it leave
      no traces of improvement? Can it be that I am deceived in my conclusions?
      No, I see that I have nothing to hope for, but everything to fear, which
      tends to drive me from the walks of time.

 Oh! in this dead night, if loud winds arise,

     To lash the surge and bluster in the skies,

     May the west its furious rage display,

     Toss me with storms in the watery way.

 (Enter Gracia.)

 G. Oh, Amelia, is it you, the object of grief, the daughter of opulence,
      of wisdom and philosophy, that thus complaineth? It cannot be you are the
      child of misfortune, speaking of the monuments of former ages, which were
      allotted not for the reflection of the distressed, but for the fearless
      and bold.

 A. Not the child of poverty, Gracia, or the heir of glory and peace, but
      of fate. Remember, I have wealth more than wit can number; I have had
      power more than kings could emcompass; yet the world seems a desert; all
      nature appears an afflictive spectacle of warring passions. This blind
      fatality, that capriciously sports with the rules and lives of mortals,
      tells me that the mountains will never again send forth the water of their
      springs to my thirst. Oh, that I might be freed and set at liberty from
      wretchedness! But I fear, I fear this will never be.

 G. Why, Amelia, this untimely grief? What has caused the sorrows that
      bespeak better and happier days, to those lavish out such heaps of misery?
      You are aware that your instructive lessons embellish the mind with holy
      truths, by wedding its attention to none but great and noble affections.

 A. This, of course, is some consolation. I will ever love my own species
      with feelings of a fond recollection, and while I am studying to advance
      the universal philanthropy, and the spotless name of my own sex, I will
      try to build my own upon the pleasing belief that I have accelerated the
      advancement of one who whispers of departed confidence.

 And I, like some poor peasant fated to reside

     Remote from friends, in a forest wide.

     Oh, see what woman's woes and human wants require,

     Since that great day hath spread the seed of sinful fire.

 G. Look up, thou poor disconsolate; you speak of quitting earthly
      enjoyments. Unfold thy bosom to a friend, who would be willing to
      sacrifice every enjoyment for the restoration of the dignity and
      gentleness of mind which used to grace your walks, and which is so natural
      to yourself; not only that, but your paths were strewed with flowers of
      every hue and of every order.

 With verdant green the mountains glow,

     For thee, for thee, the lilies grow;

     Far stretched beneath the tented hills,

     A fairer flower the valley fills.

 A. Oh, would to Heaven I could give you a short narrative of my former
      prospects for happiness, since you have acknowledged to be an unchangeable
      confidant—the richest of all other blessings. Oh, ye names forever
      glorious, ye celebrated scenes, ye renowned spot of my hymeneal moments;
      how replete is your chart with sublime reflections! How many profound
      vows, decorated with immaculate deeds, are written upon the surface of
      that precious spot of earth where I yielded up my life of celibacy, bade
      youth with all its beauties a final adieu, took a last farewell of the
      laurels that had accompanied me up the hill of my juvenile career. It was
      then I began to descend toward the valley of disappointment and sorrow; it
      was then I cast my little bark upon a mysterious ocean of wedlock, with
      him who then smiled and caressed me, but, alas! now frowns with
      bitterness, and has grown jealous and cold toward me, because the ring he
      gave me is misplaced or lost. Oh, bear me, ye flowers of memory, softly
      through the eventful history of past times; and ye places that have
      witnessed the progression of man in the circle of so many societies, and,
      oh, aid my recollection, while I endeavor to trace the vicissitudes of a
      life devoted in endeavoring to comfort him that I claim as the object of
      my wishes.

 Ah! ye mysterious men, of all the world, how few

     Act just to Heaven and to your promise true!

     But He who guides the stars with a watchful eye,

     The deeds of men lay open without disguise;

     Oh, this alone will avenge the wrongs I bear,

     For all the oppressed are His peculiar care.

 (F. makes a slight noise.)

 A. Who is there—Farcillo?

 G. Then I must gone. Heaven protect you. Oh, Amelia, farewell, be of good
      cheer.

 May you stand like Olympus' towers,

     Against earth and all jealous powers!

     May you, with loud shouts ascend on high

     Swift as an eagle in the upper sky.

 A. Why so cold and distant tonight, Farcillo? Come, let us each other
      greet, and forget all the past, and give security for the future.

 F. Security! talk to me about giving security for the future—what an
      insulting requisition! Have you said your prayers tonight, Madam Amelia?

 A. Farcillo, we sometimes forget our duty, particularly when we expect to
      be caressed by others.

 F. If you bethink yourself of any crime, or of any fault, that is yet
      concealed from the courts of Heaven and the thrones of grace, I bid you
      ask and solicit forgiveness for it now.

 A. Oh, be kind, Farcillo, don't treat me so. What do you mean by all this?

 F. Be kind, you say; you, madam, have forgot that kindness you owe to me,
      and bestowed it upon another; you shall suffer for your conduct when you
      make your peace with your God. I would not slay thy unprotected spirit. I
      call to Heaven to be my guard and my watch—I would not kill thy
      soul, in which all once seemed just, right, and perfect; but I must be
      brief, woman.

 A. What, talk you of killing? Oh, Farcillo, Farcillo, what is the matter?

 F. Aye, I do, without doubt; mark what I say, Amelia.

 A. Then, O God, O Heaven, and Angels, be propitious, and have mercy upon
      me.

 F. Amen to that, madam, with all my heart, and with all my soul.

 A. Farcillo, listen to me one moment; I hope you will not kill me.

 F. Kill you, aye, that I will; attest it, ye fair host of light, record
      it, ye dark imps of hell!

 A. Oh, I fear you—you are fatal when darkness covers your brow; yet
      I know not why I should fear, since I never wronged you in all my life. I
      stand, sir, guiltless before you.

 F. You pretend to say you are guiltless! Think of thy sins, Amelia; think,
      oh, think, hidden woman.

 A. Wherein have I not been true to you? That death is unkind, cruel, and
      unnatural, that kills for living.

 F. Peace, and be still while I unfold to thee.

 A. I will, Farcillo, and while I am thus silent, tell me the cause of such
      cruel coldness in an hour like this.

 F. That ring , oh, that ring I so loved, and gave thee as the ring
      of my heart; the allegiance you took to be faithful, when it was
      presented; the kisses and smiles with which you honored it. You became
      tired of the donor, despised it as a plague, and finally gave it to Malos,
      the hidden, the vile traitor.

 A. No, upon my word and honor, I never did; I appeal to the Most High to
      bear me out in this matter. Send for Malos, and ask him.

 F. Send for Malos, aye! Malos you wish to see; I thought so. I knew you
      could not keep his name concealed. Amelia, sweet Amelia, take heed, take
      heed of perjury; you are on the stage of death, to suffer for your sins .

 A. What, not to die I hope, my Farcillo, my ever beloved.

 F. Yes, madam, to die a traitor's death. Shortly your spirit shall take
      its exit; therefore confess freely thy sins, for to deny tends only to
      make me groan under the bitter cup thou hast made for me. Thou art to die
      with the name of traitor on thy brow!

 A. Then, O Lord, have mercy upon me; give me courage, give me grace and
      fortitude to stand this hour of trial.

 F. Amen, I say, with all my heart.

 A. And, oh, Farcillo, will you have mercy, too? I never intentionally
      offended you in all my life, never loved Malos, never gave him
      cause to think so, as the high court of Justice will acquit me before its
      tribunal.

 F. Oh, false, perjured woman, thou didst chill my blood, and makest me a
      demon like thyself. I saw the ring.

 A. He found it, then, or got it clandestinely; send for him, and let him
      confess the truth; let his confession be sifted.

 F. And you still wish to see him! I tell you, madam, he hath already
      confessed, and thou knowest the darkness of thy heart.

 A. What, my deceived Farcillo, that I gave him the ring, in which all my
      affections were concentrated? Oh, surely not.

 F. Aye, he did. Ask thy conscience, and it will speak with a voice of
      thunder to thy soul.

 A. He will not say so, he dare not, he cannot.

 F. No, he will not say so now, because his mouth, I trust, is hushed in
      death, and his body stretched to the four winds of heaven, to be torn to
      pieces by carnivorous birds.

 A. What, he is dead, and gone to the world of spirits with that
      declaration in his mouth? Oh, unhappy man! Oh, insupportable hour!

 F. Yes, and had all his sighs and looks and tears been lives, my great
      revenge could have slain them all, without the least condemnation.

 A. Alas! he is ushered into eternity without testing the matter for which
      I am abused and sentenced and condemned to die.

 F. Cursed, infernal woman! Weepest thou for him to my face? He that hath
      robbed me of my peace, my energy, the whole love of my life? Could I call
      the fabled Hydra, I would have him live and perish, survive and die, until
      the sun itself would grow dim with age. I would make him have the thirst
      of a Tantalus, and roll the wheel of an Ixion, until the stars of heaven
      should quit their brilliant stations.

 A. Oh, invincible God, save me! Oh, unsupportable moment! Oh, heavy hour!
      Banish me, Farcillo—send me where no eye can ever see me, where no
      sound shall ever great my ear; but, oh, slay me not, Farcillo; vent thy
      rage and thy spite upon this emaciated frame of mine, only spare my life.

 F. Your petitions avail nothing, cruel Amelia.

 A. Oh, Farcillo, perpetrate the dark deed tomorrow; let me live till then,
      for my past kindness to you, and it may be some kind angel will show to
      you that I am not only the object of innocence, but one who never loved
      another but your noble self.

 F. Amelia, the decree has gone forth, it is to be done, and that quickly;
      thou art to die, madam.

 A. But half an hour allow me, to see my father and my only child, to tell
      her the treachery and vanity of this world.

 F. There is no alternative, there is no pause: my daughter shall not see
      its deceptive mother die; your father shall not know that his daughter
      fell disgraced, despised by all but her enchanting Malos.

 A. Oh, Farcillo, put up thy threatening dagger into its scabbard; let it
      rest and be still, just while I say one prayer for thee and for my child.

 F. It is too late, thy doom is fixed, thou hast not confessed to Heaven or
      to me, my child's protector—thou art to die. Ye powers of earth and
      heaven, protect and defend me in this alone. ( Stabs her while imploring
      for mercy. )

 A. Oh, Farcillo, Farcillo, a guiltless death I die.

 F. Die! die! die!

 (Gracia enters running, falls on her knees weeping, and kisses Amelia.)

 G. Oh, Farcillo, Farcillo! oh, Farcillo!

 F. I am here, the genius of the age, and the avenger of my wrongs.

 G. Oh, lady, speak once more; sweet Amelia, oh, speak again. Gone, gone—yes,
      forever gone! Farcillo, oh, cold-hearted Farcillo, some evil fiend hath
      urged you to do this, Farcillo.

 F. Say not so again, or you shall receive the same fate. I did the
      glorious deed, madam—beware, then, how you talk.

 G. I fear not your implements of war; I will let you know you have not the
      power to do me harm. If you have a heart of triple brass, it shall be
      reached and melted, and thy blood shall chill thy veins and grow stiff in
      thy arteries. Here is the ring of the virtuous and innocent murdered
      Amelia; I obtained it from Malos, who yet lives, in hopes that he will
      survive the wound given him, and says he got it clandestinely—declares
      Amelia to be the princess of truth and virtue, invulnerable to anything
      like forgetting her first devotion to thee. The world has heard of your
      conduct and your jealousy, and with one universal voice declares her to be
      the best of all in piety; that she is the star of this great universe, and
      a more virtuous woman never lived since the wheels of time began. Oh, had
      you waited till tomorrow, or until I had returned, some kind window would
      have been opened to her relief. But, alas! she is gone—yes, forever
      gone, to try the realities of an unknown world!

 (Farcillo leaning over the body of Amelia.)

 F. Malos not dead, and here is my ring! Oh, Amelia! falsely murdered! Oh,
      bloody deed! Oh, wretch that I am! Oh, angels forgive me! Oh, God,
      withhold thy vengeance! Oh, Amelia! if Heaven would make a thousand worlds
      like this, set with diamonds, and all of one perfect chrysolite, I would
      not have done this for them all, I would not have frowned and cursed as I
      did. Oh, she was heavenly true, nursed in the very lap of bright angels!
      Cursed slave that I am! Jealousy, oh! thou infernal demon! Lost, lost to
      every sense of honor! Oh! Amelia—heaven-born Amelia—dead,
      dead! Oh! oh! oh!—then let me die with thee. Farewell! farewell! ye
      world that deceived me! ( Stabs himself .)

 Soon after the excitement of this tragical scene was over, and the
      enlisted feeling for Amelia had grown more buoyant with Elfonzo and
      Ambulinia, he determined to visit his retired home, and make the necessary
      improvements to enjoy a better day; consequently he conveyed the following
      lines to Ambulinia:

 Go tell the world that hope is glowing,

     Go bid the rocks their silence break,

     Go tell the stars that love is glowing,

     Then bid the hero his lover take.

 In the region where scarcely the foot of man hath ever trod, where the
      woodman hath not found his way, lies a blooming grove, seen only by the
      sun when he mounts his lofty throne, visited only by the light of the
      stars, to whom are entrusted the guardianship of earth, before the sun
      sinks to rest in his rosy bed. High cliffs of rocks surround the romantic
      place, and in the small cavity of the rocky wall grows the daffodil clear
      and pure; and as the wind blows along the enchanting little mountain which
      surrounds the lonely spot, it nourishes the flowers with the dew-drops of
      heaven. Here is the seat of Elfonzo; darkness claims but little victory
      over this dominion, and in vain does she spread out her gloomy wings. Here
      the waters flow perpetually, and the trees lash their tops together to bid
      the welcome visitor a happy muse. Elfonzo, during his short stay in the
      country, had fully persuaded himself that it was his duty to bring this
      solemn matter to an issue. A duty that he individually owed, as a
      gentleman, to the parents of Ambulinia, a duty in itself involving not
      only his own happiness and his own standing in society, but one that
      called aloud the act of the parties to make it perfect and complete. How
      he should communicate his intentions to get a favorable reply, he was at a
      loss to know; he knew not whether to address Esq. Valeer in prose or in
      poetry, in a jocular or an argumentative manner, or whether he should use
      moral suasion, legal injunction, or seizure and take by reprisal; if it
      was to do the latter, he would have no difficulty in deciding in his own
      mind, but his gentlemanly honor was at stake; so he concluded to address
      the following letter to the father and mother of Ambulinia, as his address
      in person he knew would only aggravate the old gentleman, and perhaps his
      lady.

  Cumming, Ga., January 22, 1844

 Mr. and Mrs. Valeer—

 Again I resume the pleasing task of addressing you, and once more beg an
        immediate answer to my many salutations. From every circumstance that
        has taken place, I feel in duty bound to comply with my obligations; to
        forfeit my word would be more than I dare do; to break my pledge, and my
        vows that have been witnessed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of
        an unseen Deity, would be disgraceful on my part, as well as ruinous to
        Ambulinia. I wish no longer to be kept in suspense about this matter. I
        wish to act gentlemanly in every particular. It is true, the promises I
        have made are unknown to any but Ambulinia, and I think it unnecessary
        to here enumerate them, as they who promise the most generally perform
        the least. Can you for a moment doubt my sincerity or my character? My
        only wish is, sir, that you may calmly and dispassionately look at the
        situation of the case, and if your better judgment should dictate
        otherwise, my obligations may induce me to pluck the flower that you so
        diametrically opposed. We have sworn by the saints—by the gods of
        battle, and by that faith whereby just men are made perfect—to be
        united. I hope, my dear sir, you will find it convenient as well as
        agreeable to give me a favorable answer, with the signature of Mrs.
        Valeer, as well as yourself.

 With very great esteem,

 your humble servant,

 J. I. Elfonzo.



 The moon and stars had grown pale when Ambulinia had retired to rest. A
      crowd of unpleasant thoughts passed through her bosom. Solitude dwelt in
      her chamber—no sound from the neighboring world penetrated its
      stillness; it appeared a temple of silence, of repose, and of mystery. At
      that moment she heard a still voice calling her father. In an instant,
      like the flash of lightning, a thought ran through her mind that it must
      be the bearer of Elfonzo's communication. “It is not a dream!” she said,
      “no, I cannot read dreams. Oh! I would to Heaven I was near that glowing
      eloquence—that poetical language—it charms the mind in an
      inexpressible manner, and warms the coldest heart.” While consoling
      herself with this strain, her father rushed into her room almost frantic
      with rage, exclaiming: “Oh, Ambulinia! Ambulinia!! undutiful, ungrateful
      daughter! What does this mean? Why does this letter bear such
      heart-rending intelligence? Will you quit a father's house with this
      debased wretch, without a place to lay his distracted head; going up and
      down the country, with every novel object that may chance to wander
      through this region. He is a pretty man to make love known to his
      superiors, and you, Ambulinia, have done but little credit to yourself by
      honoring his visits. Oh, wretchedness! can it be that my hopes of
      happiness are forever blasted! Will you not listen to a father's
      entreaties, and pay some regard to a mother's tears. I know, and I do pray
      that God will give me fortitude to bear with this sea of troubles, and
      rescue my daughter, my Ambulinia, as a brand from the eternal burning.”
       “Forgive me, father, oh! forgive thy child,” replied Ambulinia. “My heart
      is ready to break, when I see you in this grieved state of agitation. Oh!
      think not so meanly of me, as that I mourn for my own danger. Father, I am
      only woman. Mother, I am only the templement of thy youthful years, but
      will suffer courageously whatever punishment you think proper to inflict
      upon me, if you will but allow me to comply with my most sacred promises—if
      you will but give me my personal right and my personal liberty. Oh,
      father! if your generosity will but give me these, I ask nothing more.
      When Elfonzo offered me his heart, I gave him my hand, never to forsake
      him, and now may the mighty God banish me before I leave him in adversity.
      What a heart must I have to rejoice in prosperity with him whose offers I
      have accepted, and then, when poverty comes, haggard as it may be, for me
      to trifle with the oracles of Heaven, and change with every fluctuation
      that may interrupt our happiness—like the politician who runs the
      political gantlet for office one day, and the next day, because the
      horizon is darkened a little, he is seen running for his life, for fear he
      might perish in its ruins. Where is the philosophy, where is the
      consistency, where is the charity, in conduct like this? Be happy then, my
      beloved father, and forget me; let the sorrow of parting break down the
      wall of separation and make us equal in our feeling; let me now say how
      ardently I love you; let me kiss that age-worn cheek, and should my tears
      bedew thy face, I will wipe them away. Oh, I never can forget you; no,
      never, never!”

 “Weep not,” said the father, “Ambulinia. I will forbid Elfonzo my house,
      and desire that you may keep retired a few days. I will let him know that
      my friendship for my family is not linked together by cankered chains; and
      if he ever enters upon my premises again, I will send him to his long
      home.” “Oh, father! let me entreat you to be calm upon this occasion, and
      though Elfonzo may be the sport of the clouds and winds, yet I feel
      assured that no fate will send him to the silent tomb until the God of the
      Universe calls him hence with a triumphant voice.”

 Here the father turned away, exclaiming: “I will answer his letter in a
      very few words, and you, madam, will have the goodness to stay at home
      with your mother; and remember, I am determined to protect you from the
      consuming fire that looks so fair to your view.”

  Cumming, January 22, 1844.

 Sir—In regard to your request, I am as I ever have been, utterly
        opposed to your marrying into my family; and if you have any regard for
        yourself, or any gentlemanly feeling, I hope you will mention it to me
        no more; but seek some other one who is not so far superior to you in
        standing.

 W. W. Valeer.



 When Elfonzo read the above letter, he became so much depressed in spirits
      that many of his friends thought it advisable to use other means to bring
      about the happy union. “Strange,” said he, “that the contents of this
      diminutive letter should cause me to have such depressed feelings; but
      there is a nobler theme than this. I know not why my military title is not as great as that of Squire Valeer . For my life I cannot see
      that my ancestors are inferior to those who are so bitterly opposed to my
      marriage with Ambulinia. I know I have seen huge mountains before me, yet,
      when I think that I know gentlemen will insult me upon this delicate
      matter, should I become angry at fools and babblers, who pride themselves
      in their impudence and ignorance? No. My equals! I know not where to find
      them. My inferiors! I think it beneath me; and my superiors! I think it
      presumption; therefore, if this youthful heart is protected by any of the
      divine rights, I never will betray my trust.”

 He was aware that Ambulinia had a confidence that was, indeed, as firm and
      as resolute as she was beautiful and interesting. He hastened to the
      cottage of Louisa, who received him in her usual mode of pleasantness, and
      informed him that Ambulinia had just that moment left. “Is it possible?”
       said Elfonzo. “Oh, murdered hours! Why did she not remain and be the
      guardian of my secrets? But hasten and tell me how she has stood this
      trying scene, and what are her future determinations.” “You know,” said
      Louisa, “Major Elfonzo, that you have Ambulinia's first love, which is of
      no small consequence. She came here about twilight, and shed many precious
      tears in consequence of her own fate with yours. We walked silently in yon
      little valley you see, where we spent a momentary repose. She seemed to be
      quite as determined as ever, and before we left that beautiful spot she
      offered up a prayer to Heaven for thee.” “I will see her then,” replied
      Elfonzo, “though legions of enemies may oppose. She is mine by
      foreordination—she is mine by prophesy—she is mine by her own
      free will, and I will rescue her from the hands of her oppressors. Will
      you not, Miss Louisa, assist me in my capture?”

 “I will certainly, by the aid of Divine Providence,” answered Louisa,
      “endeavor to break those slavish chains that bind the richest of prizes;
      though allow me, Major, to entreat you to use no harsh means on this
      important occasion; take a decided stand, and write freely to Ambulinia
      upon this subject, and I will see that no intervening cause hinders its
      passage to her. God alone will save a mourning people. Now is the day and
      now is the hour to obey a command of such valuable worth.” The Major felt
      himself grow stronger after this short interview with Louisa. He felt as
      if he could whip his weight in wildcats—he knew he was master of his
      own feelings, and could now write a letter that would bring this
      litigation to an issue. 

  Cumming, January 24, 1844.

 Dear Ambulinia—

 We have now reached the most trying moment of our lives; we are pledged
        not to forsake our trust; we have waited for a favorable hour to come,
        thinking your friends would settle the matter agreeably among
        themselves, and finally be reconciled to our marriage; but as I have
        waited in vain, and looked in vain, I have determined in my own mind to
        make a proposition to you, though you may think it not in accord with
        your station, or compatible with your rank; yet, “sub hoc signo vinces.”
         You know I cannot resume my visits, in consequence of the utter
        hostility that your father has to me; therefore the consummation of our
        union will have to be sought for in a more sublime sphere, at the
        residence of a respectable friend of this village. You cannot have any
        scruples upon this mode of proceeding, if you will but remember it
        emanates from one who loves you better than his own life—who is
        more than anxious to bid you welcome to a new and happy home. Your
        warmest associates say come; the talented, the learned, the wise, and
        the experienced say come;—all these with their friends say, come.
        Viewing these, with many other inducements, I flatter myself that you
        will come to the embraces of your Elfonzo; for now is the time of your
        acceptance of the day of your liberation. You cannot be ignorant,
        Ambulinia, that thou art the desire of my heart; its thoughts are too
        noble, and too pure, to conceal themselves from you. I shall wait for
        your answer to this impatiently, expecting that you will set the time to
        make your departure, and to be in readiness at a moment's warning to
        share the joys of a more preferable life. This will be handed to you by
        Louisa, who will take a pleasure in communicating anything to you that
        may relieve your dejected spirits, and will assure you that I now stand
        ready, willing, and waiting to make good my vows.

 I am, dear Ambulinia, yours

 truly, and forever,

 J. I. Elfonzo.



 Louisa made it convenient to visit Mr. Valeer's, though they did not
      suspect her in the least the bearer of love epistles; consequently, she
      was invited in the room to console Ambulinia, where they were left alone.
      Ambulinia was seated by a small table—her head resting on her hand—her
      brilliant eyes were bathed in tears. Louisa handed her the letter of
      Elfonzo, when another spirit animated her features—the spirit of
      renewed confidence that never fails to strengthen the female character in
      an hour of grief and sorrow like this, and as she pronounced the last
      accent of his name, she exclaimed, “And does he love me yet! I never will
      forget your generosity, Louisa. Oh, unhappy and yet blessed Louisa! may
      you never feel what I have felt—may you never know the pangs of
      love. Had I never loved, I never would have been unhappy; but I turn to
      Him who can save, and if His wisdom does not will my expected union, I
      know He will give me strength to bear my lot. Amuse yourself with this
      little book, and take it as an apology for my silence,” said Ambulinia,
      “while I attempt to answer this volume of consolation.” “Thank you,” said
      Louisa, “you are excusable upon this occasion; but I pray you, Ambulinia,
      to be expert upon this momentous subject, that there may be nothing
      mistrustful upon my part.” “I will,” said Ambulinia, and immediately
      resumed her seat and addressed the following to Elfonzo:

  Cumming, Ga., January 28, 1844.

 Devoted Elfonzo—

 I hail your letter as a welcome messenger of faith, and can now say
        truly and firmly that my feelings correspond with yours. Nothing shall
        be wanting on my part to make my obedience your fidelity. Courage and
        perseverance will accomplish success. Receive this as my oath, that
        while I grasp your hand in my own imagination, we stand united before a
        higher tribunal than any on earth. All the powers of my life, soul, and
        body, I devote to thee. Whatever dangers may threaten me, I fear not to
        encounter them. Perhaps I have determined upon my own destruction, by
        leaving the house of the best of parents; be it so; I flee to you; I
        share your destiny, faithful to the end. The day that I have concluded
        upon for this task is sabbath next, when the family with the
        citizens are generally at church. For Heaven's sake let not that day
        pass unimproved: trust not till tomorrow, it is the cheat of life—the
        future that never comes—the grave of many noble births—the
        cavern of ruined enterprise: which like the lightning's flash is born,
        and dies, and perishes, ere the voice of him who sees can cry, behold!
        behold!! You may trust to what I say, no power shall tempt me to
        betray confidence. Suffer me to add one word more.

 I will soothe thee, in all thy grief,

     Beside the gloomy river;

     And though thy love may yet be brief;

     Mine is fixed forever.

 Receive the deepest emotions of my heart for thy constant love, and may
        the power of inspiration be thy guide, thy portion, and thy all. In
        great haste,

 Yours faithfully,

 Ambulinia.



 “I now take my leave of you, sweet girl,” said Louisa, “sincerely wishing
      you success on Sabbath next.” When Ambulinia's letter was handed to
      Elfonzo, he perused it without doubting its contents. Louisa charged him
      to make but few confidants; but like most young men who happened to win
      the heart of a beautiful girl, he was so elated with the idea that he felt
      as a commanding general on parade, who had confidence in all, consequently
      gave orders to all. The appointed Sabbath, with a delicious breeze and
      cloudless sky, made its appearance. The people gathered in crowds to the
      church—the streets were filled with neighboring citizens, all
      marching to the house of worship. It is entirely useless for me to attempt
      to describe the feelings of Elfonzo and Ambulinia, who were silently
      watching the movements of the multitude, apparently counting them as then
      entered the house of God, looking for the last one to darken the door. The
      impatience and anxiety with which they waited, and the bliss they
      anticipated on the eventful day, is altogether indescribable. Those that
      have been so fortunate as to embark in such a noble enterprise know all
      its realities; and those who have not had this inestimable privilege will
      have to taste its sweets before they can tell to others its joys, its
      comforts, and its Heaven-born worth. Immediately after Ambulinia had
      assisted the family off to church, she took advantage of that opportunity
      to make good her promises. She left a home of enjoyment to be wedded to
      one whose love had been justifiable. A few short steps brought her to the
      presence of Louisa, who urged her to make good use of her time, and not to
      delay a moment, but to go with her to her brother's house, where Elfonzo
      would forever make her happy. With lively speed, and yet a graceful air,
      she entered the door and found herself protected by the champion of her
      confidence. The necessary arrangements were fast making to have the two
      lovers united—everything was in readiness except the parson; and as
      they are generally very sanctimonious on such occasions, the news got to
      the parents of Ambulinia before the everlasting knot was tied, and they
      both came running, with uplifted hands and injured feelings, to arrest
      their daughter from an unguarded and hasty resolution. Elfonzo desired to
      maintain his ground, but Ambulinia thought it best for him to leave, to
      prepare for a greater contest. He accordingly obeyed, as it would have
      been a vain endeavor for him to have battled against a man who was armed
      with deadly weapons; and besides, he could not resist the request of such
      a pure heart. Ambulinia concealed herself in the upper story of the house,
      fearing the rebuke of her father; the door was locked, and no chastisement
      was now expected. Esquire Valeer, whose pride was already touched,
      resolved to preserve the dignity of his family. He entered the house
      almost exhausted, looking wildly for Ambulinia. “Amazed and astonished
      indeed I am,” said he, “at a people who call themselves civilized, to
      allow such behavior as this. Ambulinia, Ambulinia!” he cried, “come to the
      calls of your first, your best, and your only friend. I appeal to you,
      sir,” turning to the gentleman of the house, “to know where Ambulinia has
      gone, or where is she?” “Do you mean to insult me, sir, in my own house?”
       inquired the gentleman. “I will burst,” said Mr. V., “asunder every door
      in your dwelling, in search of my daughter, if you do not speak quickly,
      and tell me where she is. I care nothing about that outcast rubbish of
      creation, that mean, low-lived Elfonzo, if I can but obtain Ambulinia. Are
      you not going to open this door?” said he. “By the Eternal that made
      Heaven and earth! I will go about the work instantly, if this is not
      done!” The confused citizens gathered from all parts of the village, to
      know the cause of this commotion. Some rushed into the house; the door
      that was locked flew open, and there stood Ambulinia, weeping. “Father, be
      still,” said she, “and I will follow thee home.” But the agitated man
      seized her, and bore her off through the gazing multitude. “Father!” she
      exclaimed, “I humbly beg your pardon—I will be dutiful—I will
      obey thy commands. Let the sixteen years I have lived in obedience to thee
      be my future security.” “I don't like to be always giving credit, when the
      old score is not paid up, madam,” said the father. The mother followed
      almost in a state of derangement, crying and imploring her to think
      beforehand, and ask advice from experienced persons, and they would tell
      her it was a rash undertaking. “Oh!” said she, “Ambulinia, my daughter,
      did you know what I have suffered—did you know how many nights I
      have whiled away in agony, in pain, and in fear, you would pity the
      sorrows of a heartbroken mother.”

 “Well, mother,” replied Ambulinia, “I know I have been disobedient; I am
      aware that what I have done might have been done much better; but oh! what
      shall I do with my honor? it is so dear to me; I am pledged to Elfonzo.
      His high moral worth is certainly worth some attention; moreover, my vows,
      I have no doubt, are recorded in the book of life, and must I give these
      all up? must my fair hopes be forever blasted? Forbid it, father; oh!
      forbid it, mother; forbid it, Heaven.” “I have seen so many beautiful
      skies overclouded,” replied the mother, “so many blossoms nipped by the
      frost, that I am afraid to trust you to the care of those fair days, which
      may be interrupted by thundering and tempestuous nights. You no doubt
      think as I did—life's devious ways were strewn with sweet-scented
      flowers, but ah! how long they have lingered around me and took their
      flight in the vivid hope that laughs at the drooping victims it has
      murdered.” Elfonzo was moved at this sight. The people followed on to see
      what was going to become of Ambulinia, while he, with downcast looks, kept
      at a distance, until he saw them enter the abode of the father, thrusting
      her, that was the sigh of his soul, out of his presence into a solitary
      apartment, when she exclaimed, “Elfonzo! Elfonzo! oh, Elfonzo! where art
      thou, with all thy heroes? haste, oh! haste, come thou to my relief. Ride
      on the wings of the wind! Turn thy force loose like a tempest, and roll on
      thy army like a whirlwind, over this mountain of trouble and confusion.
      Oh, friends! if any pity me, let your last efforts throng upon the green
      hills, and come to the relief of Ambulinia, who is guilty of nothing but
      innocent love.” Elfonzo called out with a loud voice, “My God, can I stand
      this! arise up, I beseech you, and put an end to this tyranny. Come, my
      brave boys,” said he, “are you ready to go forth to your duty?” They stood
      around him. “Who,” said he, “will call us to arms? Where are my
      thunderbolts of war? Speak ye, the first who will meet the foe! Who will
      go forward with me in this ocean of grievous temptation? If there is one
      who desires to go, let him come and shake hands upon the altar of
      devotion, and swear that he will be a hero; yes, a Hector in a cause like
      this, which calls aloud for a speedy remedy.” “Mine be the deed,” said a
      young lawyer, “and mine alone; Venus alone shall quit her station before I
      will forsake one jot or tittle of my promise to you; what is death to me?
      what is all this warlike army, if it is not to win a victory? I love the
      sleep of the lover and the mighty; nor would I give it over till the blood
      of my enemies should wreak with that of my own. But God forbid that our
      fame should soar on the blood of the slumberer.” Mr. Valeer stands at his
      door with the frown of a demon upon his brow, with his dangerous weapon
      ready to strike the first man who should enter his door. “Who will arise
      and go forward through blood and carnage to the rescue of my Ambulinia?”
       said Elfonzo. “All,” exclaimed the multitude; and onward they went, with
      their implements of battle. Others, of a more timid nature, stood among
      the distant hills to see the result of the contest.

 Elfonzo took the lead of his band. Night arose in clouds; darkness
      concealed the heavens; but the blazing hopes that stimulated them gleamed
      in every bosom. All approached the anxious spot; they rushed to the front
      of the house and, with one exclamation, demanded Ambulinia. “Away, begone,
      and disturb my peace no more,” said Mr. Valeer. “You are a set of base,
      insolent, and infernal rascals. Go, the northern star points your path
      through the dim twilight of the night; go, and vent your spite upon the
      lonely hills; pour forth your love, you poor, weak-minded wretch, upon
      your idleness and upon your guitar, and your fiddle; they are fit subjects
      for your admiration, for let me assure you, though this sword and iron
      lever are cankered, yet they frown in sleep, and let one of you dare to
      enter my house this night and you shall have the contents and the weight
      of these instruments.” “Never yet did base dishonor blur my name,” said
      Elfonzo; “mine is a cause of renown; here are my warriors; fear and
      tremble, for this night, though hell itself should oppose, I will endeavor
      to avenge her whom thou hast banished in solitude. The voice of Ambulinia
      shall be heard from that dark dungeon.” At that moment Ambulinia appeared
      at the window above, and with a tremulous voice said, “Live, Elfonzo! oh!
      live to raise my stone of moss! why should such language enter your heart?
      why should thy voice rend the air with such agitation? I bid thee live,
      once more remembering these tears of mine are shed alone for thee, in this
      dark and gloomy vault, and should I perish under this load of trouble,
      join the song of thrilling accents with the raven above my grave, and lay
      this tattered frame beside the banks of the Chattahoochee or the stream of
      Sawney's brook; sweet will be the song of death to your Ambulinia. My
      ghost shall visit you in the smiles of Paradise, and tell your high fame
      to the minds of that region, which is far more preferable than this lonely
      cell. My heart shall speak for thee till the latest hour; I know faint and
      broken are the sounds of sorrow, yet our souls, Elfonzo, shall hear the
      peaceful songs together. One bright name shall be ours on high, if we are
      not permitted to be united here; bear in mind that I still cherish my old
      sentiments, and the poet will mingle the names of Elfonzo and Ambulinia in
      the tide of other days.” “Fly, Elfonzo,” said the voices of his united
      band, “to the wounded heart of your beloved. All enemies shall fall
      beneath thy sword. Fly through the clefts, and the dim spark shall sleep
      in death.” Elfonzo rushes forward and strikes his shield against the door,
      which was barricaded, to prevent any intercourse. His brave sons throng
      around him. The people pour along the streets, both male and female, to
      prevent or witness the melancholy scene.

 “To arms, to arms!” cried Elfonzo; “here is a victory to be won, a prize
      to be gained that is more to me that the whole world beside.” “It cannot
      be done tonight,” said Mr. Valeer. “I bear the clang of death; my strength
      and armor shall prevail. My Ambulinia shall rest in this hall until the
      break of another day, and if we fall, we fall together. If we die, we die
      clinging to our tattered rights, and our blood alone shall tell the
      mournful tale of a murdered daughter and a ruined father.” Sure enough, he
      kept watch all night, and was successful in defending his house and
      family. The bright morning gleamed upon the hills, night vanished away,
      the Major and his associates felt somewhat ashamed that they had not been
      as fortunate as they expected to have been; however, they still leaned
      upon their arms in dispersed groups; some were walking the streets, others
      were talking in the Major's behalf. Many of the citizen suspended
      business, as the town presented nothing but consternation. A novelty that
      might end in the destruction of some worthy and respectable citizens. Mr.
      Valeer ventured in the streets, though not without being well armed. Some
      of his friends congratulated him on the decided stand he had taken, and
      hoped he would settle the matter amicably with Elfonzo, without any
      serious injury. “Me,” he replied, “what, me, condescend to fellowship with
      a coward, and a low-lived, lazy, undermining villain? no, gentlemen, this
      cannot be; I had rather be borne off, like the bubble upon the dark blue
      ocean, with Ambulinia by my side, than to have him in the ascending or
      descending line of relationship. Gentlemen,” continued he, “if Elfonzo is
      so much of a distinguished character, and is so learned in the fine arts,
      why do you not patronize such men? why not introduce him into your
      families, as a gentleman of taste and of unequaled magnanimity? why are
      you so very anxious that he should become a relative of mine? Oh,
      gentlemen, I fear you yet are tainted with the curiosity of our first
      parents, who were beguiled by the poisonous kiss of an old ugly serpent,
      and who, for one apple, damned all mankind. I wish to divest
      myself, as far as possible, of that untutored custom. I have long since
      learned that the perfection of wisdom, and the end of true philosophy, is
      to proportion our wants to our possessions, our ambition to our
      capacities; we will then be a happy and a virtuous people.” Ambulinia was
      sent off to prepare for a long and tedious journey. Her new acquaintances
      had been instructed by her father how to treat her, and in what manner,
      and to keep the anticipated visit entirely secret. Elfonzo was watching
      the movements of everybody; some friends had told him of the plot that was
      laid to carry off Ambulinia. At night, he rallied some two or three of his
      forces, and went silently along to the stately mansion; a faint and
      glimmering light showed through the windows; lightly he steps to the door;
      there were many voices rallying fresh in fancy's eye; he tapped the
      shutter; it was opened instantly, and he beheld once more, seated beside
      several ladies, the hope of all his toils; he rushed toward her, she rose
      from her seat, rejoicing; he made one mighty grasp, when Ambulinia
      exclaimed, “Huzza for Major Elfonzo! I will defend myself and you, too,
      with this conquering instrument I hold in my hand; huzza, I say, I now
      invoke time's broad wing to shed around us some dewdrops of verdant
      spring.”

 But the hour had not come for this joyous reunion; her friends struggled
      with Elfonzo for some time, and finally succeeded in arresting her from
      his hands. He dared not injure them, because they were matrons whose
      courage needed no spur; she was snatched from the arms of Elfonzo, with so
      much eagerness, and yet with such expressive signification, that he calmly
      withdrew from this lovely enterprise, with an ardent hope that he should
      be lulled to repose by the zephyrs which whispered peace to his soul.
      Several long days and nights passed unmolested, all seemed to have
      grounded their arms of rebellion, and no callidity appeared to be going on
      with any of the parties. Other arrangements were made by Ambulinia; she
      feigned herself to be entirely the votary of a mother's care, and she, by
      her graceful smiles, that manhood might claim his stern dominion in some
      other region, where such boisterous love was not so prevalent. This gave
      the parents a confidence that yielded some hours of sober joy; they
      believed that Ambulinia would now cease to love Elfonzo, and that her
      stolen affections would now expire with her misguided opinions. They
      therefore declined the idea of sending her to a distant land. But oh! they
      dreamed not of the rapture that dazzled the fancy of Ambulinia, who would
      say, when alone, youth should not fly away on his rosy pinions, and leave
      her to grapple in the conflict with unknown admirers.

 No frowning age shall control

     The constant current of my soul,

     Nor a tear from pity's eye

     Shall check my sympathetic sigh.

 With this resolution fixed in her mind, one dark and dreary night, when
      the winds whistled and the tempest roared, she received intelligence that
      Elfonzo was then waiting, and every preparation was then ready, at the
      residence of Dr. Tully, and for her to make a quick escape while the
      family was reposing. Accordingly she gathered her books, went the wardrobe
      supplied with a variety of ornamental dressing, and ventured alone in the
      streets to make her way to Elfonzo, who was near at hand, impatiently
      looking and watching her arrival. “What forms,” said she, “are those
      rising before me? What is that dark spot on the clouds? I do wonder what
      frightful ghost that is, gleaming on the red tempest? Oh, be merciful and
      tell me what region you are from. Oh, tell me, ye strong spirits, or ye
      dark and fleeting clouds, that I yet have a friend.” “A friend,” said a
      low, whispering voice. “I am thy unchanging, thy aged, and thy
      disappointed mother. Why brandish in that hand of thine a javelin of
      pointed steel? Why suffer that lip I have kissed a thousand times to
      equivocate? My daughter, let these tears sink deep into thy soul, and no
      longer persist in that which may be your destruction and ruin. Come, my
      dear child, retract your steps, and bear me company to your welcome home.”
       Without one retorting word, or frown from her brow, she yielded to the
      entreaties of her mother, and with all the mildness of her former
      character she went along with the silver lamp of age, to the home of
      candor and benevolence. Her father received her cold and formal politeness—“Where
      has Ambulinia been, this blustering evening, Mrs. Valeer?” inquired he.
      “Oh, she and I have been taking a solitary walk,” said the mother; “all
      things, I presume, are now working for the best.”

 Elfonzo heard this news shortly after it happened. “What,” said he, “has
      heaven and earth turned against me? I have been disappointed times without
      number. Shall I despair?—must I give it over? Heaven's decrees will
      not fade; I will write again—I will try again; and if it traverses a
      gory field, I pray forgiveness at the altar of justice.”

  Desolate Hill, Cumming, Geo., 1844.

 Unconquered and Beloved Ambulinia— I have only time to say to you,
        not to despair; thy fame shall not perish; my visions are brightening
        before me. The whirlwind's rage is past, and we now shall subdue our
        enemies without doubt. On Monday morning, when your friends are at
        breakfast, they will not suspect your departure, or even mistrust me
        being in town, as it has been reported advantageously that I have left
        for the west. You walk carelessly toward the academy grove, where you
        will find me with a lightning steed, elegantly equipped to bear you off
        where we shall be joined in wedlock with the first connubial rights.
        Fail not to do this—think not of the tedious relations of our
        wrongs—be invincible. You alone occupy all my ambition, and I
        alone will make you my happy spouse, with the same unimpeached veracity.
        I remain, forever, your devoted friend and admirer, J. I. Elfonzo.



 The appointed day ushered in undisturbed by any clouds; nothing disturbed
      Ambulinia's soft beauty. With serenity and loveliness she obeys the
      request of Elfonzo. The moment the family seated themselves at the table—“Excuse
      my absence for a short time,” said she, “while I attend to the placing of
      those flowers, which should have been done a week ago.” And away she ran
      to the sacred grove, surrounded with glittering pearls, that indicated her
      coming. Elfonzo hails her with his silver bow and his golden harp. They
      meet—Ambulinia's countenance brightens—Elfonzo leads up his
      winged steed. “Mount,” said he, “ye true-hearted, ye fearless soul—the
      day is ours.” She sprang upon the back of the young thunder bolt, a
      brilliant star sparkles upon her head, with one hand she grasps the reins,
      and with the other she holds an olive branch. “Lend thy aid, ye strong
      winds,” they exclaimed, “ye moon, ye sun, and all ye fair host of heaven,
      witness the enemy conquered.” “Hold,” said Elfonzo, “thy dashing steed.”
       “Ride on,” said Ambulinia, “the voice of thunder is behind us.” And onward
      they went, with such rapidity that they very soon arrived at Rural
      Retreat, where they dismounted, and were united with all the solemnities
      that usually attend such divine operations. They passed the day in
      thanksgiving and great rejoicing, and on that evening they visited their
      uncle, where many of their friends and acquaintances had gathered to
      congratulate them in the field of untainted bliss. The kind old gentleman
      met them in the yard: “Well,” said he, “I wish I may die, Elfonzo, if you
      and Ambulinia haven't tied a knot with your tongue that you can't untie
      with your teeth. But come in, come in, never mind, all is right—the
      world still moves on, and no one has fallen in this great battle.”

 Happy now is their lot! Unmoved by misfortune, they live among the fair
      beauties of the South. Heaven spreads their peace and fame upon the arch
      of the rainbow, and smiles propitiously at their triumph, through the
      tears of the storm.