THE LOVE OF LONG AGO

 The old-fashioned chateau was built on a wooded knoll in the midst of tall
      trees with dark-green foliage; the park extended to a great distance, in
      one direction to the edge of the forest, in another to the distant
      country. A few yards from the front of the house was a huge stone basin
      with marble ladies taking a bath; other, basins were seen at intervals
      down to the foot of the slope, and a stream of water fell in cascades from
      one basin to another.

 From the manor house, which preserved the grace of a superannuated
      coquette, down to the grottos incrusted with shell-work, where slumbered
      the loves of a bygone age, everything in this antique demesne had retained
      the physiognomy of former days. Everything seemed to speak still of
      ancient customs, of the manners of long ago, of former gallantries, and of
      the elegant trivialities so dear to our grandmothers.

 In a parlor in the style of Louis XV, whose walls were covered with
      shepherds paying court to shepherdesses, beautiful ladies in hoop-skirts,
      and gallant gentlemen in wigs, a very old woman, who seemed dead as soon
      as she ceased to move, was almost lying down in a large easy-chair, at
      each side of which hung a thin, mummy-like hand.

 Her dim eyes were gazing dreamily toward the distant horizon as if they
      sought to follow through the park the visions of her youth. Through the
      open window every now and then came a breath of air laden with the odor of
      grass and the perfume of flowers. It made her white locks flutter around
      her wrinkled forehead and old memories float through her brain.

 Beside her, on a tapestried stool, a young girl, with long fair hair
      hanging in braids down her back, was embroidering an altar-cloth. There
      was a pensive expression in her eyes, and it was easy to see that she was
      dreaming, while her agile fingers flew over her work.

 But the old lady turned round her head, and said:

 “Berthe, read me something out of the newspapers, that I may still
      know sometimes what is going on in the world.”

 The young girl took up a newspaper, and cast a rapid glance over it.

 “There is a great deal about politics, grandmamma; shall I pass that
      over?”

 “Yes, yes, darling. Are there no love stories? Is gallantry, then,
      dead in France, that they no longer talk about abductions or adventures as
      they did formerly?”

 The girl made a long search through the columns of the newspaper.

 “Here is one,” she said. “It is entitled 'A Love Drama!'”

 The old woman smiled through her wrinkles. “Read that for me,”
      she said.

 And Berthe commenced. It was a case of vitriol throwing. A wife, in order
      to avenge herself on her husband's mistress, had burned her face and eyes.
      She had left the Court of Assizes acquitted, declared to be innocent, amid
      the applause of the crowd.

 The grandmother moved about excitedly in her chair, and exclaimed:

 “This is horrible—why, it is perfectly horrible!

 “See whether you can find anything else to read to me, darling.”

 Berthe again made a search; and farther down among the reports of criminal
      cases, she read:

 “'Gloomy Drama. A shop girl, no longer young, allowed herself to be
      led astray by a young man. Then, to avenge herself on her lover, whose
      heart proved fickle, she shot him with a revolver. The unhappy man is
      maimed for life. The jury, all men of moral character, condoning the
      illicit love of the murderess, honorably acquitted her.'”

 This time the old grandmother appeared quite shocked, and, in a trembling
      voice, she said:

 “Why, you people are mad nowadays. You are mad! The good God has
      given you love, the only enchantment in life. Man has added to this
      gallantry the only distraction of our dull hours, and here you are mixing
      up with it vitriol and revolvers, as if one were to put mud into a flagon
      of Spanish wine.”

 Berthe did not seem to understand her grandmother's indignation.

 “But, grandmamma, this woman avenged herself. Remember she was
      married, and her husband deceived her.”

 The grandmother gave a start.

 “What ideas have they been filling your head with, you young girls
      of today?”

 Berthe replied:

 “But marriage is sacred, grandmamma.”

 The grandmother's heart, which had its birth in the great age of
      gallantry, gave a sudden leap.

 “It is love that is sacred,” she said. “Listen, child,
      to an old woman who has seen three generations, and who has had a long,
      long experience of men and women. Marriage and love have nothing in
      common. We marry to found a family, and we form families in order to
      constitute society. Society cannot dispense with marriage. If society is a
      chain, each family is a link in that chain. In order to weld those links,
      we always seek metals of the same order. When we marry, we must bring
      together suitable conditions; we must combine fortunes, unite similar
      races and aim at the common interest, which is riches and children. We
      marry only once my child, because the world requires us to do so, but we
      may love twenty times in one lifetime because nature has made us like
      this. Marriage, you see, is law, and love is an instinct which impels us,
      sometimes along a straight, and sometimes along a devious path. The world
      has made laws to combat our instincts—it was necessary to make them;
      but our instincts are always stronger, and we ought not to resist them too
      much, because they come from God; while the laws only come from men. If we
      did not perfume life with love, as much love as possible, darling, as we
      put sugar into drugs for children, nobody would care to take it just as it
      is.”

 Berthe opened her eyes wide in astonishment. She murmured:

 “Oh! grandmamma, we can only love once.”

 The grandmother raised her trembling hands toward Heaven, as if again to
      invoke the defunct god of gallantries. She exclaimed indignantly:

 “You have become a race of serfs, a race of common people. Since the
      Revolution, it is impossible any longer to recognize society. You have
      attached big words to every action, and wearisome duties to every corner
      of existence; you believe in equality and eternal passion. People have
      written poetry telling you that people have died of love. In my time
      poetry was written to teach men to love every woman. And we! when we liked
      a gentleman, my child, we sent him a page. And when a fresh caprice came
      into our hearts, we were not slow in getting rid of the last Lover—unless
      we kept both of them.”

 The old woman smiled a keen smile, and a gleam of roguery twinkled in her
      gray eye, the intellectual, skeptical roguery of those people who did not
      believe that they were made of the same clay as the rest, and who lived as
      masters for whom common beliefs were not intended.

 The young girl, turning very pale, faltered out:

 “So, then, women have no honor?”

 The grandmother ceased to smile. If she had kept in her soul some of
      Voltaire's irony, she had also a little of Jean Jacques's glowing
      philosophy: “No honor! because we loved, and dared to say so, and
      even boasted of it? But, my child, if one of us, among the greatest ladies
      in France, had lived without a lover, she would have had the entire court
      laughing at her. Those who wished to live differently had only to enter a
      convent. And you imagine, perhaps, that your husbands will love but you
      alone, all their lives. As if, indeed, this could be the case. I tell you
      that marriage is a thing necessary in order that society should exist, but
      it is not in the nature of our race, do you understand? There is only one
      good thing in life, and that is love. And how you misunderstand it! how
      you spoil it! You treat it as something solemn like a sacrament, or
      something to be bought, like a dress.”

 The young girl caught the old woman's trembling hands in her own.

 “Hold your tongue, I beg of you, grandmamma!”

 And, on her knees, with tears in her eyes, she prayed to Heaven to bestow
      on her a great passion, one sole, eternal passion in accordance with the
      dream of modern poets, while the grandmother, kissing her on the forehead,
      quite imbued still with that charming, healthy reason with which gallant
      philosophers tinctured the thought of the eighteenth century, murmured:

 “Take care, my poor darling! If you believe in such folly as that,
      you will be very unhappy.”