THE FISHING HOLE

 “Cuts and wounds which caused death.” Such was the charge upon
      which Leopold Renard, upholsterer, was summoned before the Court of
      Assizes.

 Round him were the principal witnesses, Madame Flameche, widow of the
      victim, and Louis Ladureau, cabinetmaker, and Jean Durdent, plumber.

 Near the criminal was his wife, dressed in black, an ugly little woman,
      who looked like a monkey dressed as a lady.

 This is how Renard (Leopold) recounted the drama.

 “Good heavens, it is a misfortune of which I was the prime victim
      all the time, and with which my will has nothing to do. The facts are
      their own commentary, Monsieur le President. I am an honest man, a
      hard-working man, an upholsterer, living in the same street for the last
      sixteen years, known, liked, respected and esteemed by all, as my
      neighbors can testify, even the porter's wife, who is not amiable every
      day. I am fond of work, I am fond of saving, I like honest men and
      respectable amusements. That is what has ruined me, so much the worse for
      me; but as my will had nothing to do with it, I continue to respect
      myself.

 “Every Sunday for the last five years my wife and I have spent the
      day at Passy. We get fresh air, and, besides, we are fond of fishing. Oh!
      we are as fond of it as we are of little onions. Melie inspired me with
      that enthusiasm, the jade, and she is more enthusiastic than I am, the
      scold, seeing that all the mischief in this business is her fault, as you
      will see immediately.

 “I am strong and mild tempered, without a pennyworth of malice in
      me. But she! oh! la! la! she looks like nothing; she is short and thin.
      Very well, she does more mischief than a weasel. I do not deny that she
      has some good qualities; she has some, and very important ones for a man
      in business. But her character! Just ask about it in the neighborhood, and
      even the porter's wife, who has just sent me about my business—she
      will tell you something about it.

 “Every day she used to find fault with my mild temper: 'I would not
      put up with this! I would not put up with that.' If I had listened to her,
      Monsieur le President, I should have had at least three hand-to-hand
      fights a month . . . .”

 Madame Renard interrupted him: “And for good reasons, too; they
      laugh best who laugh last.”

 He turned toward her frankly: “Well, I can't blame you, since you
      were not the cause of it.”

 Then, facing the President again, he said:

 “I will continue. We used to go to Passy every Saturday evening, so
      as to begin fishing at daybreak the next morning. It is a habit which has
      become second nature with us, as the saying is. Three years ago this
      summer I discovered a place, oh! such a spot. Oh, dear, dear! In the
      shade, eight feet of water at least and perhaps ten, a hole with cavities
      under the bank, a regular nest for fish and a paradise for the fisherman.
      I might look upon that fishing hole as my property, Monsieur le President,
      as I was its Christopher Columbus. Everybody in the neighborhood knew it,
      without making any opposition. They would say: 'That is Renard's place';
      and nobody would have gone there, not even Monsieur Plumeau, who is well
      known, be it said without any offense, for poaching on other people's
      preserves.

 “Well, I returned to this place of which I felt certain, just as if
      I had owned it. I had scarcely got there on Saturday, when I got into
      Delila, with my wife. Delila is my Norwegian boat, which I had built by
      Fournaire, and which is light and safe. Well, as I said, we got into the
      boat and we were going to set bait, and for setting bait there is none to
      be compared with me, and they all know it. You want to know with what I
      bait? I cannot answer that question; it has nothing to do with the
      accident. I cannot answer; that is my secret. There are more than three
      hundred people who have asked me; I have been offered glasses of brandy
      and liqueur, fried fish, matelotes, to make me tell. But just go and try
      whether the chub will come. Ah! they have tempted my stomach to get at my
      secret, my recipe. Only my wife knows, and she will not tell it any more
      than I will. Is not that so, Melie?”

 The president of the court interrupted him.

 “Just get to the facts as soon as you can,” and the accused
      continued: “I am getting to them, I am getting to them. Well, on
      Saturday, July 8, we left by the twenty-five past five train and before
      dinner we went to set bait as usual. The weather promised to keep fine and
      I said to Melie: 'All right for tomorrow.' And she replied: 'If looks like
      it,' We never talk more than that together.

 “And then we returned to dinner. I was happy and thirsty, and that
      was the cause of everything. I said to Melie: 'Look here, Melie, it is
      fine weather, suppose I drink a bottle of 'Casque a meche'.' That is a
      weak white wine which we have christened so, because if you drink too much
      of it it prevents you from sleeping and takes the place of a nightcap. Do
      you understand me?

 “She replied: 'You can do as you please, but you will be ill again
      and will not be able to get up tomorrow.' That was true, sensible and
      prudent, clear-sighted, I must confess. Nevertheless I could not resist,
      and I drank my bottle. It all came from that.

 “Well, I could not sleep. By Jove! it kept me awake till two o'clock
      in the morning, and then I went to sleep so soundly that I should not have
      heard the angel sounding his trump at the last judgment.

 “In short, my wife woke me at six o'clock and I jumped out of bed,
      hastily put on my trousers and jersey, washed my face and jumped on board
      Delila. But it was too late, for when I arrived at my hole it was already
      occupied! Such a thing had never happened to me in three years, and it
      made me feel as if I were being robbed under my own eyes. I said to
      myself: 'Confound it all! confound it!' And then my wife began to nag at
      me. 'Eh! what about your 'Casque a meche'? Get along, you drunkard! Are
      you satisfied, you great fool?' I could say nothing, because it was all
      true, but I landed all the same near the spot and tried to profit by what
      was left. Perhaps after all the fellow might catch nothing and go away.

 “He was a little thin man in white linen coat and waistcoat and a
      large straw hat, and his wife, a fat woman, doing embroidery, sat behind
      him.

 “When she saw us take up our position close to them she murmured:
      'Are there no other places on the river?' My wife, who was furious,
      replied: 'People who have any manners make inquiries about the habits of
      the neighborhood before occupying reserved spots.'

 “As I did not want a fuss, I said to her: 'Hold your tongue, Melie.
      Let them alone, let them alone; we shall see.'

 “Well, we fastened Delila under the willows and had landed and were
      fishing side by side, Melie and I, close to the two others. But here,
      monsieur, I must enter into details.

 “We had only been there about five minutes when our neighbor's line
      began to jerk twice, thrice; and then he pulled out a chub as thick as my
      thigh; rather less, perhaps, but nearly as big! My heart beat, the
      perspiration stood on my forehead and Melie said to me: 'Well, you sot,
      did you see that?'

 “Just then Monsieur Bru, the grocer of Poissy, who is fond of
      gudgeon fishing, passed in a boat and called out to me: 'So somebody has
      taken your usual place, Monsieur Renard?' And I replied: 'Yes, Monsieur
      Bru, there are some people in this world who do not know the rules of
      common politeness.'

 “The little man in linen pretended not to hear, nor his fat lump of
      a wife, either.”

 Here the president interrupted him a second time: “Take care, you
      are insulting the widow, Madame Flameche, who is present.”

 Renard made his excuses: “I beg your pardon, I beg your pardon; my
      anger carried me away. Well, not a quarter of an hour had passed when the
      little man caught another chub, and another almost immediately, and
      another five minutes later.

 “Tears were in my eyes, and I knew that Madame Renard was boiling
      with rage, for she kept on nagging at me: 'Oh, how horrid! Don't you see
      that he is robbing you of your fish? Do you think that you will catch
      anything? Not even a frog, nothing whatever. Why, my hands are tingling,
      just to think of it.'

 “But I said to myself: 'Let us wait until twelve o'clock. Then this
      poacher will go to lunch and I shall get my place again. As for me,
      Monsieur le President, I lunch on that spot every Sunday. We bring our
      provisions in Delila. But there! At noon the wretch produced a chicken in
      a newspaper, and while he was eating, he actually caught another chub!

 “Melie and I had a morsel also, just a bite, a mere nothing, for our
      heart was not in it.

 “Then I took up my newspaper to aid my digestion. Every Sunday I
      read the Gil Blas in the shade by the side of the water. It is Columbine's
      day, you know; Columbine, who writes the articles in the Gil Blas. I
      generally put Madame Renard into a rage by pretending to know this
      Columbine. It is not true, for I do not know her and have never seen her,
      but that does not matter. She writes very well, and then she says things
      that are pretty plain for a woman. She suits me and there are not many of
      her sort.

 “Well, I began to tease my wife, but she got angry immediately, and
      very angry, so I held my tongue. At that moment our two witnesses who are
      present here, Monsieur Ladureau and Monsieur Durdent, appeared on the
      other side of the river. We knew each other by sight. The little man began
      to fish again and he caught so many that I trembled with vexation and his
      wife said: 'It is an uncommonly good spot, and we will come here always,
      Desire.' As for me, a cold shiver ran down my back, and Madame Renard kept
      repeating: 'You are not a man; you have the blood of a chicken in your
      veins'; and suddenly I said to her: 'Look here, I would rather go away or
      I shall be doing something foolish.'

 “And she whispered to me, as if she had put a red-hot iron under my
      nose: 'You are not a man. Now you are going to run away and surrender your
      place! Go, then, Bazaine!'

 “I felt hurt, but yet I did not move, while the other fellow pulled
      out a bream: Oh, I never saw such a large one before, never! And then my
      wife began to talk aloud, as if she were thinking, and you can see her
      tricks. She said: 'That is what one might call stolen fish, seeing that we
      set the bait ourselves. At any rate, they ought to give us back the money
      we have spent on bait.'

 “Then the fat woman in the cotton dress said in her turn: 'Do you
      mean to call us thieves, madame?' Explanations followed and compliments
      began to fly. Oh, Lord! those creatures know some good ones. They shouted
      so loud that our two witnesses, who were on the other bank, began to call
      out by way of a joke: 'Less noise over there; you will interfere with your
      husbands' fishing.'

 “The fact is that neither the little man nor I moved any more than
      if we had been two tree stumps. We remained there, with our eyes fixed on
      the water, as if we had heard nothing; but, by Jove! we heard all the
      same. 'You are a thief! You are nothing better than a tramp! You are a
      regular jade!' and so on and so on. A sailor could not have said more.

 “Suddenly I heard a noise behind me and turned round. It was the
      other one, the fat woman, who had attacked my wife with her parasol.
      Whack, whack! Melie got two of them. But she was furious, and she hits
      hard when she is in a rage. She caught the fat woman by the hair and then
      thump! thump! slaps in the face rained down like ripe plums. I should have
      let them fight it out: women together, men together. It does not do to mix
      the blows. But the little man in the linen jacket jumped up like a devil
      and was going to rush at my wife. Ah! no, no, not that, my friend! I
      caught the gentleman with the end of my fist, and crash! crash! One on the
      nose, the other in the stomach. He threw up his arms and legs and fell on
      his back into the river, just into the hole.

 “I should have fished him out most certainly, Monsieur le President,
      if I had had time. But, to make matters worse, the fat woman had the upper
      hand and was pounding Melie for all she was worth. I know I ought not to
      have interfered while the man was in the water, but I never thought that
      he would drown and said to myself: 'Bah, it will cool him.'

 “I therefore ran up to the women to separate them and all I received
      was scratches and bites. Good Lord, what creatures! Well, it took me five
      minutes, and perhaps ten, to separate those two viragos. When I turned
      round there was nothing to be seen.

 “The water was as smooth as a lake and the others yonder kept
      shouting: 'Fish him out! fish him out!' It was all very well to say that,
      but I cannot swim and still less dive.

 “At last the man from the dam came and two gentlemen with boathooks,
      but over a quarter of an hour had passed. He was found at the bottom of
      the hole, in eight feet of water, as I have said. There he was, the poor
      little man, in his linen suit! Those are the facts such as I have sworn
      to. I am innocent, on my honor.”

 The witnesses having given testimony to the same effect, the accused was
      acquitted.