THE ROUT OF THE WHITE HUSSARS.

 It was not in the open fight
     We threw away the sword,
   But in the lonely watching
     In the darkness by the ford.

   The waters lapped, the night-wind blew,
   Full-armed the Fear was born and grew,
   And we were flying ere we knew
     From panic in the night.
             —Beoni Bar.

 Some people hold that an English Cavalry regiment cannot run. This is a
      mistake. I have seen four hundred and thirty-seven sabres flying over the
      face of the country in abject terror—have seen the best Regiment
      that ever drew bridle, wiped off the Army List for the space of two hours.
      If you repeat this tale to the White Hussars they will, in all
      probability, treat you severely. They are not proud of the incident.

 You may know the White Hussars by their “side,” which is greater than that
      of all the Cavalry Regiments on the roster. If this is not a sufficient
      mark, you may know them by their old brandy. It has been sixty years in
      the Mess and is worth going far to taste.

 Ask for the “McGaire” old brandy, and see that you get it. If the Mess
      Sergeant thinks that you are uneducated, and that the genuine article will
      be lost on you, he will treat you accordingly. He is a good man. But, when
      you are at Mess, you must never talk to your hosts about forced marches or
      long-distance rides. The Mess are very sensitive; and, if they think that
      you are laughing at them, will tell you so.

 As the White Hussars say, it was all the Colonel's fault. He was a new
      man, and he ought never to have taken the Command. He said that the
      Regiment was not smart enough. This to the White Hussars, who knew they
      could walk round any Horse and through any Guns, and over any Foot on the
      face of the earth! That insult was the first cause of offence.

 Then the Colonel cast the Drum-Horse—the Drum-Horse of the White
      Hussars! Perhaps you do not see what an unspeakable crime he had
      committed. I will try to make it clear. The soul of the Regiment lives in
      the Drum-Horse, who carries the silver kettle-drums. He is nearly always a
      big piebald Waler. That is a point of honor; and a Regiment will spend
      anything you please on a piebald. He is beyond the ordinary laws of
      casting. His work is very light, and he only manoeuvres at a foot-pace.
      Wherefore, so long as he can step out and look handsome, his well-being is
      assured. He knows more about the Regiment than the Adjutant, and could not
      make a mistake if he tried.

 The Drum-Horse of the White Hussars was only eighteen years old, and
      perfectly equal to his duties. He had at least six years' more work in
      him, and carried himself with all the pomp and dignity of a Drum-Major of
      the Guards. The Regiment had paid Rs. 1,200 for him.

 But the Colonel said that he must go, and he was cast in due form and
      replaced by a washy, bay beast as ugly as a mule, with a ewe-neck,
      rat-tail, and cow-hocks. The Drummer detested that animal, and the best of
      the Band-horses put back their ears and showed the whites of their eyes at
      the very sight of him. They knew him for an upstart and no gentleman. I
      fancy that the Colonel's ideas of smartness extended to the Band, and that
      he wanted to make it take part in the regular parade movements. A Cavalry
      Band is a sacred thing. It only turns out for Commanding Officers'
      parades, and the Band Master is one degree more important than the
      Colonel. He is a High Priest and the “Keel Row” is his holy song. The
      “Keel Row” is the Cavalry Trot; and the man who has never heard that tune
      rising, high and shrill, above the rattle of the Regiment going past the
      saluting-base, has something yet to hear and understand.

 When the Colonel cast the Drum-horse of the White Hussars, there was
      nearly a mutiny.

 The officers were angry, the Regiment were furious, and the Bandsman swore—like
      troopers. The Drum-Horse was going to be put up to auction—public
      auction—to be bought, perhaps, by a Parsee and put into a cart! It
      was worse than exposing the inner life of the Regiment to the whole world,
      or selling the Mess Plate to a Jew—a black Jew.

 The Colonel was a mean man and a bully. He knew what the Regiment thought
      about his action; and, when the troopers offered to buy the Drum-Horse, he
      said that their offer was mutinous and forbidden by the Regulations.

 But one of the Subalterns—Hogan-Yale, an Irishman—bought the
      Drum-Horse for Rs. 160 at the sale; and the Colonel was wroth. Yale
      professed repentance—he was unnaturally submissive—and said
      that, as he had only made the purchase to save the horse from possible
      ill-treatment and starvation, he would now shoot him and end the business.
      This appeared to soothe the Colonel, for he wanted the Drum-Horse disposed
      of. He felt that he had made a mistake, and could not of course
      acknowledge it. Meantime, the presence of the Drum-Horse was an annoyance
      to him.

 Yale took to himself a glass of the old brandy, three cheroots, and his
      friend, Martyn; and they all left the Mess together. Yale and Martyn
      conferred for two hours in Yale's quarters; but only the bull-terrier who
      keeps watch over Yale's boot-trees knows what they said. A horse, hooded
      and sheeted to his ears, left Yale's stables and was taken, very
      unwillingly, into the Civil Lines. Yale's groom went with him. Two men
      broke into the Regimental Theatre and took several paint-pots and some
      large scenery brushes. Then night fell over the Cantonments, and there was
      a noise as of a horse kicking his loose-box to pieces in Yale's stables.
      Yale had a big, old, white Waler trap-horse.

 The next day was a Thursday, and the men, hearing that Yale was going to
      shoot the Drum-Horse in the evening, determined to give the beast a
      regular regimental funeral—a finer one than they would have given
      the Colonel had he died just then. They got a bullock-cart and some
      sacking, and mounds and mounds of roses, and the body, under sacking, was
      carried out to the place where the anthrax cases were cremated; two-thirds
      of the Regiment followed. There was no Band, but they all sang “The Place
      where the old Horse died” as something respectful and appropriate to the
      occasion. When the corpse was dumped into the grave and the men began
      throwing down armfuls of roses to cover it, the Farrier-Sergeant ripped
      out an oath and said aloud:—“Why, it ain't the Drum-Horse any more
      than it's me!” The Troop-Sergeant-Majors asked him whether he had left his
      head in the Canteen. The Farrier-Sergeant said that he knew the
      Drum-Horse's feet as well as he knew his own; but he was silenced when he
      saw the regimental number burnt in on the poor stiff, upturned near-fore.

 Thus was the Drum-Horse of the White Hussars buried; the Farrier-Sergeant
      grumbling. The sacking that covered the corpse was smeared in places with
      black paint; and the Farrier-Sergeant drew attention to this fact. But the
      Troop-Sergeant-Major of E Troop kicked him severely on the shin, and told
      him that he was undoubtedly drunk.

 On the Monday following the burial, the Colonel sought revenge on the
      White Hussars. Unfortunately, being at that time temporarily in Command of
      the Station, he ordered a Brigade field-day. He said that he wished to
      make the regiment “sweat for their damned insolence,” and he carried out
      his notion thoroughly. That Monday was one of the hardest days in the
      memory of the White Hussars.

 They were thrown against a skeleton-enemy, and pushed forward, and
      withdrawn, and dismounted, and “scientifically handled” in every possible
      fashion over dusty country, till they sweated profusely.

 Their only amusement came late in the day, when they fell upon the battery
      of Horse Artillery and chased it for two mile's. This was a personal
      question, and most of the troopers had money on the event; the Gunners
      saying openly that they had the legs of the White Hussars. They were
      wrong. A march-past concluded the campaign, and when the Regiment got back
      to their Lines, the men were coated with dirt from spur to chin-strap.

 The White Hussars have one great and peculiar privilege. They won it at
      Fontenoy, I think.

 Many Regiments possess special rights, such as wearing collars with
      undress uniform, or a bow of ribbon between the shoulders, or red and
      white roses in their helmets on certain days of the year. Some rights are
      connected with regimental saints, and some with regimental successes. All
      are valued highly; but none so highly as the right of the White Hussars to
      have the Band playing when their horses are being watered in the Lines.
      Only one tune is played, and that tune never varies. I don't know its real
      name, but the White Hussars call it:—“Take me to London again.” It
      sounds very pretty. The Regiment would sooner be struck off the roster
      than forego their distinction.

 After the “dismiss” was sounded, the officers rode off home to prepare for
      stables; and the men filed into the lines, riding easy.

 That is to say, they opened their tight buttons, shifted their helmets,
      and began to joke or to swear as the humor took them; the more careful
      slipping off and easing girths and curbs. A good trooper values his mount
      exactly as much as he values himself, and believes, or should believe,
      that the two together are irresistible where women or men, girls or guns,
      are concerned.

 Then the Orderly-Officer gave the order:—“Water horses,” and the
      Regiment loafed off to the squadron-troughs, which were in rear of the
      stables and between these and the barracks. There were four huge troughs,
      one for each squadron, arranged en echelon, so that the whole Regiment
      could water in ten minutes if it liked. But it lingered for seventeen, as
      a rule, while the Band played.

 The band struck up as the squadrons filed off the troughs and the men
      slipped their feet out of the stirrups and chaffed each other.

 The sun was just setting in a big, hot bed of red cloud, and the road to
      the Civil Lines seemed to run straight into the sun's eye.

 There was a little dot on the road. It grew and grew till it showed as a
      horse, with a sort of gridiron thing on his back. The red cloud glared
      through the bars of the gridiron. Some of the troopers shaded their eyes
      with their hands and said:—“What the mischief as that there 'orse
      got on 'im!”

 In another minute they heard a neigh that every soul—horse and man—in
      the Regiment knew, and saw, heading straight towards the Band, the dead
      Drum-Horse of the White Hussars!

 On his withers banged and bumped the kettle-drums draped in crape, and on
      his back, very stiff and soldierly, sat a bare-headed skeleton.

 The band stopped playing, and, for a moment, there was a hush.

 Then some one in E troop—men said it was the Troop-Sergeant-Major—swung
      his horse round and yelled. No one can account exactly for what happened
      afterwards; but it seems that, at least, one man in each troop set an
      example of panic, and the rest followed like sheep. The horses that had
      barely put their muzzles into the trough's reared and capered; but, as
      soon as the Band broke, which it did when the ghost of the Drum-Horse was
      about a furlong distant, all hooves followed suit, and the clatter of the
      stampede—quite different from the orderly throb and roar of a
      movement on parade, or the rough horse-play of watering in camp—made
      them only more terrified. They felt that the men on their backs were
      afraid of something. When horses once know THAT, all is over except the
      butchery.

 Troop after troop turned from the troughs and ran—anywhere, and
      everywhere—like spilt quicksilver. It was a most extraordinary
      spectacle, for men and horses were in all stages of easiness, and the
      carbine-buckets flopping against their sides urged the horses on. Men were
      shouting and cursing, and trying to pull clear of the Band which was being
      chased by the Drum-Horse whose rider had fallen forward and seemed to be
      spurring for a wager.

 The Colonel had gone over to the Mess for a drink. Most of the officers
      were with him, and the Subaltern of the Day was preparing to go down to
      the lines, and receive the watering reports from the Troop-Sergeant
      Majors. When “Take me to London again” stopped, after twenty bars, every
      one in the Mess said:—“What on earth has happened?” A minute later,
      they heard unmilitary noises, and saw, far across the plain, the White
      Hussars scattered, and broken, and flying.

 The Colonel was speechless with rage, for he thought that the Regiment had
      risen against him or was unanimously drunk. The Band, a disorganized mob,
      tore past, and at its heels labored the Drum-Horse—the dead and
      buried Drum-Horse—with the jolting, clattering skeleton. Hogan-Yale
      whispered softly to Martyn:—“No wire will stand that treatment,” and
      the Band, which had doubled like a hare, came back again. But the rest of
      the Regiment was gone, was rioting all over the Province, for the dusk had
      shut in and each man was howling to his neighbor that the Drum-Horse was
      on his flank.

 Troop-Horses are far too tenderly treated as a rule. They can, on
      emergencies, do a great deal, even with seventeen stone on their backs. As
      the troopers found out.

 How long this panic lasted I cannot say. I believe that when the moon rose
      the men saw they had nothing to fear, and, by twos and threes and
      half-troops, crept back into Cantonments very much ashamed of themselves.
      Meantime, the Drum-Horse, disgusted at his treatment by old friends,
      pulled up, wheeled round, and trotted up to the Mess verandah-steps for
      bread. No one liked to run; but no one cared to go forward till the
      Colonel made a movement and laid hold of the skeleton's foot. The Band had
      halted some distance away, and now came back slowly. The Colonel called
      it, individually and collectively, every evil name that occurred to him at
      the time; for he had set his hand on the bosom of the Drum-Horse and found
      flesh and blood. Then he beat the kettle-drums with his clenched fist, and
      discovered that they were but made of silvered paper and bamboo. Next,
      still swearing, he tried to drag the skeleton out of the saddle, but found
      that it had been wired into the cantle. The sight of the Colonel, with his
      arms round the skeleton's pelvis and his knee in the old Drum-Horse's
      stomach, was striking. Not to say amusing. He worried the thing off in a
      minute or two, and threw it down on the ground, saying to the Band:—“Here,
      you curs, that's what you're afraid of.” The skeleton did not look pretty
      in the twilight. The Band-Sergeant seemed to recognize it, for he began to
      chuckle and choke. “Shall I take it away, sir?” said the Band-Sergeant.
      “Yes,” said the Colonel, “take it to Hell, and ride there yourselves!”

 The Band-Sergeant saluted, hoisted the skeleton across his saddle-bow, and
      led off to the stables. Then the Colonel began to make inquiries for the
      rest of the Regiment, and the language he used was wonderful. He would
      disband the Regiment—he would court-martial every soul in it—he
      would not command such a set of rabble, and so on, and so on. As the men
      dropped in, his language grew wilder, until at last it exceeded the utmost
      limits of free speech allowed even to a Colonel of Horse.

 Martyn took Hogan-Yale aside and suggested compulsory retirement from the
      service as a necessity when all was discovered. Martyn was the weaker man
      of the two, Hogan-Yale put up his eyebrows and remarked, firstly, that he
      was the son of a Lord, and secondly, that he was as innocent as the babe
      unborn of the theatrical resurrection of the Drum-Horse.

 “My instructions,” said Yale, with a singularly sweet smile, “were that
      the Drum-Horse should be sent back as impressively as possible. I ask you,
      AM I responsible if a mule-headed friend sends him back in such a manner
      as to disturb the peace of mind of a regiment of Her Majesty's Cavalry?”

 Martyn said:—“you are a great man and will in time become a General;
      but I'd give my chance of a troop to be safe out of this affair.”

 Providence saved Martyn and Hogan-Yale. The Second-in-Command led the
      Colonel away to the little curtained alcove wherein the subalterns of the
      white Hussars were accustomed to play poker of nights; and there, after
      many oaths on the Colonel's part, they talked together in low tones. I
      fancy that the Second-in-Command must have represented the scare as the
      work of some trooper whom it would be hopeless to detect; and I know that
      he dwelt upon the sin and the shame of making a public laughingstock of
      the scare.

 “They will call us,” said the Second-in-Command, who had really a fine
      imagination, “they will call us the 'Fly-by-Nights'; they will call us the
      'Ghost Hunters'; they will nickname us from one end of the Army list to
      the other. All the explanations in the world won't make outsiders
      understand that the officers were away when the panic began. For the honor
      of the Regiment and for your own sake keep this thing quiet.”

 The Colonel was so exhausted with anger that soothing him down was not so
      difficult as might be imagined. He was made to see, gently and by degrees,
      that it was obviously impossible to court-martial the whole Regiment, and
      equally impossible to proceed against any subaltern who, in his belief,
      had any concern in the hoax.

 “But the beast's alive! He's never been shot at all!” shouted the Colonel.
      “It's flat, flagrant disobedience! I've known a man broke for less, d——d
      sight less. They're mocking me, I tell you, Mutman! They're mocking me!”

 Once more, the Second-in-Command set himself to sooth the Colonel, and
      wrestled with him for half-an-hour. At the end of that time, the
      Regimental Sergeant-Major reported himself. The situation was rather novel
      tell to him; but he was not a man to be put out by circumstances. He
      saluted and said: “Regiment all come back, Sir.” Then, to propitiate the
      Colonel:—“An' none of the horses any the worse, Sir.”

 The Colonel only snorted and answered:—“You'd better tuck the men
      into their cots, then, and see that they don't wake up and cry in the
      night.” The Sergeant withdrew.

 His little stroke of humor pleased the Colonel, and, further, he felt
      slightly ashamed of the language he had been using. The Second-in-Command
      worried him again, and the two sat talking far into the night.

 Next day but one, there was a Commanding Officer's parade, and the Colonel
      harangued the White Hussars vigorously. The pith of his speech was that,
      since the Drum-Horse in his old age had proved himself capable of cutting
      up the Whole Regiment, he should return to his post of pride at the head
      of the band, BUT the Regiment were a set of ruffians with bad consciences.

 The White Hussars shouted, and threw everything movable about them into
      the air, and when the parade was over, they cheered the Colonel till they
      couldn't speak. No cheers were put up for Lieutenant Hogan-Yale, who
      smiled very sweetly in the background.

 Said the Second-in-Command to the Colonel, unofficially:—“These
      little things ensure popularity, and do not the least affect discipline.”

 “But I went back on my word,” said the Colonel.

 “Never mind,” said the Second-in-Command. “The White Hussars will follow
      you anywhere from today. Regiments are just like women. They will do
      anything for trinketry.”

 A week later, Hogan-Yale received an extraordinary letter from some one
      who signed himself “Secretary Charity and Zeal, 3709, E. C.,” and asked
      for “the return of our skeleton which we have reason to believe is in your
      possession.”

 “Who the deuce is this lunatic who trades in bones?” said Hogan-Yale.

 “Beg your pardon, Sir,” said the Band-Sergeant, “but the skeleton is with
      me, an' I'll return it if you'll pay the carriage into the Civil Lines.
      There's a coffin with it, Sir.”

 Hogan-Yale smiled and handed two rupees to the Band-Sergeant, saying:—“Write
      the date on the skull, will you?”

 If you doubt this story, and know where to go, you can see the date on the
      skeleton. But don't mention the matter to the White Hussars.

 I happen to know something about it, because I prepared the Drum-Horse for
      his resurrection. He did not take kindly to the skeleton at all.