THE CHRISTENING
    

      “Well doctor, a little brandy?”
    

      “With pleasure.”
    

      The old ship's surgeon, holding out his glass, watched it as it slowly
      filled with the golden liquid. Then, holding it in front of his eyes, he
      let the light from the lamp stream through it, smelled it, tasted a few
      drops and smacked his lips with relish. Then he said:
    

      “Ah! the charming poison! Or rather the seductive murderer, the
      delightful destroyer of peoples!
    

      “You people do not know it the way I do. You may have read that
      admirable book entitled L'Assommoir, but you have not, as I have, seen
      alcohol exterminate a whole tribe of savages, a little kingdom of negroes—alcohol
      calmly unloaded by the barrel by red-bearded English seamen.
    

      “Right near here, in a little village in Brittany near Pont-l'Abbe,
      I once witnessed a strange and terrible tragedy caused by alcohol. I was
      spending my vacation in a little country house left me by my father. You
      know this flat coast where the wind whistles day and night, where one
      sees, standing or prone, these giant rocks which in the olden times were
      regarded as guardians, and which still retain something majestic and
      imposing about them. I always expect to see them come to life and start to
      walk across the country with the slow and ponderous tread of giants, or to
      unfold enormous granite wings and fly toward the paradise of the Druids.
    

      “Everywhere is the sea, always ready on the slightest provocation to
      rise in its anger and shake its foamy mane at those bold enough to brave
      its wrath.
    

      “And the men who travel on this terrible sea, which, with one motion
      of its green back, can overturn and swallow up their frail barks—they
      go out in the little boats, day and night, hardy, weary and drunk. They
      are often drunk. They have a saying which says: 'When the bottle is full
      you see the reef, but when it is empty you see it no more.'
    

      “Go into one of their huts; you will never find the father there. If
      you ask the woman what has become of her husband, she will stretch her
      arms out over the dark ocean which rumbles and roars along the coast. He
      remained, there one night, when he had had too much to drink; so did her
      oldest son. She has four more big, strong, fair-haired boys. Soon it will
      be their time.
    

      “As I said, I was living in a little house near Pont-l'Abbe. I was
      there alone with my servant, an old sailor, and with a native family which
      took care of the grounds in my absence. It consisted of three persons, two
      sisters and a man, who had married one of them, and who attended to the
      garden.
    

      “A short time before Christmas my gardener's wife presented him with
      a boy. The husband asked me to stand as god-father. I could hardly deny
      the request, and so he borrowed ten francs from me for the cost of the
      christening, as he said.
    

      “The second day of January was chosen as the date of the ceremony.
      For a week the earth had been covered by an enormous white carpet of snow,
      which made this flat, low country seem vast and limitless. The ocean
      appeared to be black in contrast with this white plain; one could see it
      rolling, raging and tossing its waves as though wishing to annihilate its
      pale neighbor, which appeared to be dead, it was so calm, quiet and cold.
    

      “At nine o'clock the father, Kerandec, came to my door with his
      sister-in-law, the big Kermagan, and the nurse, who carried the infant
      wrapped up in a blanket. We started for the church. The weather was so
      cold that it seemed to dry up the skin and crack it open. I was thinking
      of the poor little creature who was being carried on ahead of us, and I
      said to myself that this Breton race must surely be of iron, if their
      children were able, as soon as they were born, to stand such an outing.
    

      “We came to the church, but the door was closed; the priest was
      late.
    

      “Then the nurse sat down on one of the steps and began to undress
      the child. At first I thought there must have been some slight accident,
      but I saw that they were leaving the poor little fellow naked completely
      naked, in the icy air. Furious at such imprudence, I protested:
    

      “'Why, you are crazy! You will kill the child!'
    

      “The woman answered quietly: 'Oh, no, sir; he must wait naked before
      the Lord.'
    

      “The father and the aunt looked on undisturbed. It was the custom.
      If it were not adhered to misfortune was sure to attend the little one.
    

      “I scolded, threatened and pleaded. I used force to try to cover the
      frail creature. All was in vain. The nurse ran away from me through the
      snow, and the body of the little one turned purple. I was about to leave
      these brutes when I saw the priest coming across the country, followed. by
      the sexton and a young boy. I ran towards him and gave vent to my
      indignation. He showed no surprise nor did he quicken his pace in the
      least. He answered:
    

      “'What can you expect, sir? It's the custom. They all do it, and
      it's of no use trying to stop them.'
    

      “'But at least hurry up!' I cried.
    

      “He answered: 'But I can't go any faster.'
    

      “He entered the vestry, while we remained outside on the church
      steps. I was suffering. But what about the poor little creature who was
      howling from the effects of the biting cold.
    

      “At last the door opened. He went into the church. But the poor
      child had to remain naked throughout the ceremony. It was interminable.
      The priest stammered over the Latin words and mispronounced them horribly.
      He walked slowly and with a ponderous tread. His white surplice chilled my
      heart. It seemed as though, in the name of a pitiless and barbarous god,
      he had wrapped himself in another kind of snow in order to torture this
      little piece of humanity that suffered so from the cold.
    

      “Finally the christening was finished according to the rites and I
      saw the nurse once more take the frozen, moaning child and wrap it up in
      the blanket.
    

      “The priest said to me: 'Do you wish to sign the register?'
    

      “Turning to my gardener, I said: 'Hurry up and get home quickly so
      that you can warm that child.' I gave him some advice so as to ward off,
      if not too late, a bad attack of pneumonia. He promised to follow my
      instructions and left with his sister-in-law and the nurse. I followed the
      priest into the vestry, and when I had signed he demanded five francs for
      expenses.
    

      “As I had already given the father ten francs, I refused to pay
      twice. The priest threatened to destroy the paper and to annul the
      ceremony. I, in turn, threatened him with the district attorney. The
      dispute was long, and I finally paid five francs.
    

      “As soon as I reached home I went down to Kerandec's to find out
      whether everything was all right. Neither father, nor sister-in-law, nor
      nurse had yet returned. The mother, who had remained alone, was in bed,
      shivering with cold and starving, for she had had nothing to eat since the
      day before.
    

      “'Where the deuce can they have gone?' I asked. She answered without
      surprise or anger, 'They're going to drink something to celebrate: It was
      the custom. Then I thought, of my ten francs which were to pay the church
      and would doubtless pay for the alcohol.
    

      “I sent some broth to the mother and ordered a good fire to be built
      in the room. I was uneasy and furious and promised myself to drive out
      these brutes, wondering with terror what was going to happen to the poor
      infant.
    

      “It was already six, and they had not yet returned. I told my
      servant to wait for them and I went to bed. I soon fell asleep and slept
      like a top. At daybreak I was awakened by my servant, who was bringing me
      my hot water.
    

      “As soon as my eyes were open I asked: 'How about Kerandec?'
    

      “The man hesitated and then stammered: 'Oh! he came back, all right,
      after midnight, and so drunk that he couldn't walk, and so were Kermagan
      and the nurse. I guess they must have slept in a ditch, for the little one
      died and they never even noticed it.'
    

      “I jumped up out of bed, crying:
    

      “'What! The child is dead?'
    

      “'Yes, sir. They brought it back to Mother Kerandec. When she saw it
      she began to cry, and now they are making her drink to console her.'
    

      “'What's that? They are making her drink!'
    

      “'Yes, sir. I only found it out this morning. As Kerandec had no
      more brandy or money, he took some wood alcohol, which monsieur gave him
      for the lamp, and all four of them are now drinking that. The mother is
      feeling pretty sick now.'
    

      “I had hastily put on some clothes, and seizing a stick, with the
      intention of applying it to the backs of these human beasts, I hastened
      towards the gardener's house.
    

      “The mother was raving drunk beside the blue body of her dead baby.
      Kerandec, the nurse, and the Kermagan woman were snoring on the floor. I
      had to take care of the mother, who died towards noon.”
    

      The old doctor was silent. He took up the brandy-bottle and poured out
      another glass. He held it up to the lamp, and the light streaming through
      it imparted to the liquid the amber color of molten topaz. With one gulp
      he swallowed the treacherous drink.