The Stranger

 It seemed to the little crowd on the wharf that she was never going to move
again. There she lay, immense, motionless on the grey crinkled water, a loop of
smoke above her, an immense flock of gulls screaming and diving after the
galley droppings at the stern. You could just see little couples
parading—little flies walking up and down the dish on the grey crinkled
tablecloth. Other flies clustered and swarmed at the edge. Now there was a
gleam of white on the lower deck—the cook’s apron or the stewardess
perhaps. Now a tiny black spider raced up the ladder on to the bridge.

 In the front of the crowd a strong-looking, middle-aged man, dressed very well,
very snugly in a grey overcoat, grey silk scarf, thick gloves and dark felt
hat, marched up and down, twirling his folded umbrella. He seemed to be the
leader of the little crowd on the wharf and at the same time to keep them
together. He was something between the sheep-dog and the shepherd.

 But what a fool—what a fool he had been not to bring any glasses! There
wasn’t a pair of glasses between the whole lot of them.

 “Curious thing, Mr. Scott, that none of us thought of glasses. We might
have been able to stir ’em up a bit. We might have managed a little
signalling. Don’t hesitate to land. Natives harmless. Or: A
welcome awaits you. All is forgiven. What? Eh?”

 Mr. Hammond’s quick, eager glance, so nervous and yet so friendly and
confiding, took in everybody on the wharf, roped in even those old chaps
lounging against the gangways. They knew, every man-jack of them, that Mrs.
Hammond was on that boat, and that he was so tremendously excited it never
entered his head not to believe that this marvellous fact meant something to
them too. It warmed his heart towards them. They were, he decided, as decent a
crowd of people—— Those old chaps over by the gangways,
too—fine, solid old chaps. What chests—by Jove! And he squared his
own, plunged his thick-gloved hands into his pockets, rocked from heel to toe.

 “Yes, my wife’s been in Europe for the last ten months. On a visit
to our eldest girl, who was married last year. I brought her up here, as far as
Salisbury, myself. So I thought I’d better come and fetch her back. Yes,
yes, yes.” The shrewd grey eyes narrowed again and searched anxiously,
quickly, the motionless liner. Again his overcoat was unbuttoned. Out came the
thin, butter-yellow watch again, and for the
twentieth—fiftieth—hundredth time he made the calculation.

 “Let me see now. It was two fifteen when the doctor’s launch went
off. Two fifteen. It is now exactly twenty-eight minutes past four. That is to
say, the doctor’s been gone two hours and thirteen minutes. Two hours and
thirteen minutes! Whee-ooh!” He gave a queer little half-whistle and
snapped his watch to again. “But I think we should have been told if
there was anything up—don’t you, Mr. Gaven?”

 “Oh, yes, Mr. Hammond! I don’t think there’s anything
to—anything to worry about,” said Mr. Gaven, knocking out his pipe
against the heel of his shoe. “At the same time—”

 “Quite so! Quite so!” cried Mr. Hammond. “Dashed
annoying!” He paced quickly up and down and came back again to his stand
between Mr. and Mrs. Scott and Mr. Gaven. “It’s getting quite dark,
too,” and he waved his folded umbrella as though the dusk at least might
have had the decency to keep off for a bit. But the dusk came slowly, spreading
like a slow stain over the water. Little Jean Scott dragged at her
mother’s hand.

 “I wan’ my tea, mammy!” she wailed.

 “I expect you do,” said Mr. Hammond. “I expect all these
ladies want their tea.” And his kind, flushed, almost pitiful glance
roped them all in again. He wondered whether Janey was having a final cup of
tea in the saloon out there. He hoped so; he thought not. It would be just like
her not to leave the deck. In that case perhaps the deck steward would bring
her up a cup. If he’d been there he’d have got it for
her—somehow. And for a moment he was on deck, standing over her, watching
her little hand fold round the cup in the way she had, while she drank the only
cup of tea to be got on board.... But now he was back here, and the Lord only
knew when that cursed Captain would stop hanging about in the stream. He took
another turn, up and down, up and down. He walked as far as the cab-stand to
make sure his driver hadn’t disappeared; back he swerved again to the
little flock huddled in the shelter of the banana crates. Little Jean Scott was
still wanting her tea. Poor little beggar! He wished he had a bit of chocolate
on him.

 “Here, Jean!” he said. “Like a lift up?” And easily,
gently, he swung the little girl on to a higher barrel. The movement of holding
her, steadying her, relieved him wonderfully, lightened his heart.

 “Hold on,” he said, keeping an arm round her.

 “Oh, don’t worry about Jean , Mr. Hammond!” said Mrs.
Scott.

 “That’s all right, Mrs. Scott. No trouble. It’s a pleasure.
Jean’s a little pal of mine, aren’t you, Jean?”

 “Yes, Mr. Hammond,” said Jean, and she ran her finger down the dent
of his felt hat.

 But suddenly she caught him by the ear and gave a loud scream. “Lo-ok,
Mr. Hammond! She’s moving! Look, she’s coming in!”

 By Jove! So she was. At last! She was slowly, slowly turning round. A bell
sounded far over the water and a great spout of steam gushed into the air. The
gulls rose; they fluttered away like bits of white paper. And whether that deep
throbbing was her engines or his heart Mr. Hammond couldn’t say. He had
to nerve himself to bear it, whatever it was. At that moment old Captain
Johnson, the harbour-master, came striding down the wharf, a leather portfolio
under his arm.

 “Jean’ll be all right,” said Mr. Scott. “I’ll
hold her.” He was just in time. Mr. Hammond had forgotten about Jean. He
sprang away to greet old Captain Johnson.

 “Well, Captain,” the eager, nervous voice rang out again,
“you’ve taken pity on us at last.”

 “It’s no good blaming me, Mr. Hammond,” wheezed old Captain
Johnson, staring at the liner. “You got Mrs. Hammond on board,
ain’t yer?”

 “Yes, yes!” said Hammond, and he kept by the harbour-master’s
side. “Mrs. Hammond’s there. Hul-lo! We shan’t be long
now!”

 With her telephone ring-ringing, the thrum of her screw filling the air, the
big liner bore down on them, cutting sharp through the dark water so that big
white shavings curled to either side. Hammond and the harbour-master kept in
front of the rest. Hammond took off his hat; he raked the decks—they were
crammed with passengers; he waved his hat and bawled a loud, strange
“Hul-lo!” across the water; and then turned round and burst out
laughing and said something—nothing—to old Captain Johnson.

 “Seen her?” asked the harbour-master.

 “No, not yet. Steady—wait a bit!” And suddenly, between two
great clumsy idiots—“Get out of the way there!” he signed
with his umbrella—he saw a hand raised—a white glove shaking a
handkerchief. Another moment, and—thank God, thank God!—there she
was. There was Janey. There was Mrs. Hammond, yes, yes, yes—standing by
the rail and smiling and nodding and waving her handkerchief.

 “Well that’s first class—first class! Well, well,
well!” He positively stamped. Like lightning he drew out his cigar-case
and offered it to old Captain Johnson. “Have a cigar, Captain!
They’re pretty good. Have a couple! Here”—and he pressed all
the cigars in the case on the harbour-master—“I’ve a couple
of boxes up at the hotel.”

 “Thenks, Mr. Hammond!” wheezed old Captain Johnson.

 Hammond stuffed the cigar-case back. His hands were shaking, but he’d got
hold of himself again. He was able to face Janey. There she was, leaning on the
rail, talking to some woman and at the same time watching him, ready for him.
It struck him, as the gulf of water closed, how small she looked on that huge
ship. His heart was wrung with such a spasm that he could have cried out. How
little she looked to have come all that long way and back by herself! Just like
her, though. Just like Janey. She had the courage of a—— And now
the crew had come forward and parted the passengers; they had lowered the rails
for the gangways.

 The voices on shore and the voices on board flew to greet each other.

 “All well?”

 “All well.”

 “How’s mother?”

 “Much better.”

 “Hullo, Jean!”

 “Hillo, Aun’ Emily!”

 “Had a good voyage?”

 “Splendid!”

 “Shan’t be long now!”

 “Not long now.”

 The engines stopped. Slowly she edged to the wharf-side.

 “Make way there—make way—make way!” And the wharf hands
brought the heavy gangways along at a sweeping run. Hammond signed to Janey to
stay where she was. The old harbour-master stepped forward; he followed. As to
“ladies first,” or any rot like that, it never entered his head.

 “After you, Captain!” he cried genially. And, treading on the old
man’s heels, he strode up the gangway on to the deck in a bee-line to
Janey, and Janey was clasped in his arms.

 “Well, well, well! Yes, yes! Here we are at last!” he stammered. It
was all he could say. And Janey emerged, and her cool little voice—the
only voice in the world for him—said,

 “Well, darling! Have you been waiting long?”

 No; not long. Or, at any rate, it didn’t matter. It was over now. But the
point was, he had a cab waiting at the end of the wharf. Was she ready to go
off. Was her luggage ready? In that case they could cut off sharp with her
cabin luggage and let the rest go hang until to-morrow. He bent over her and
she looked up with her familiar half-smile. She was just the same. Not a day
changed. Just as he’d always known her. She laid her small hand on his
sleeve.

 “How are the children, John?” she asked.

 (Hang the children!) “Perfectly well. Never better in their lives.”

 “Haven’t they sent me letters?”

 “Yes, yes—of course! I’ve left them at the hotel for you to
digest later on.”

 “We can’t go quite so fast,” said she. “I’ve got
people to say good-bye to—and then there’s the Captain.” As
his face fell she gave his arm a small understanding squeeze. “If the
Captain comes off the bridge I want you to thank him for having looked after
your wife so beautifully.” Well, he’d got her. If she wanted
another ten minutes—As he gave way she was surrounded. The whole
first-class seemed to want to say good-bye to Janey.

 “Good-bye, dear Mrs. Hammond! And next time you’re in Sydney
I’ll expect you.”

 “Darling Mrs. Hammond! You won’t forget to write to me, will
you?”

 “Well, Mrs. Hammond, what this boat would have been without you!”

 It was as plain as a pikestaff that she was by far the most popular woman on
board. And she took it all—just as usual. Absolutely composed. Just her
little self—just Janey all over; standing there with her veil thrown
back. Hammond never noticed what his wife had on. It was all the same to him
whatever she wore. But to-day he did notice that she wore a black
“costume”—didn’t they call it?—with white frills,
trimmings he supposed they were, at the neck and sleeves. All this while Janey
handed him round.

 “John, dear!” And then: “I want to introduce you
to—”

 Finally they did escape, and she led the way to her state-room. To follow Janey
down the passage that she knew so well—that was so strange to him; to
part the green curtains after her and to step into the cabin that had been hers
gave him exquisite happiness. But—confound it!—the stewardess was
there on the floor, strapping up the rugs.

 “That’s the last, Mrs. Hammond,” said the stewardess, rising
and pulling down her cuffs.

 He was introduced again, and then Janey and the stewardess disappeared into the
passage. He heard whisperings. She was getting the tipping business over, he
supposed. He sat down on the striped sofa and took his hat off. There were the
rugs she had taken with her; they looked good as new. All her luggage looked
fresh, perfect. The labels were written in her beautiful little clear
hand—“Mrs. John Hammond.”

 “Mrs. John Hammond!” He gave a long sigh of content and leaned
back, crossing his arms. The strain was over. He felt he could have sat there
for ever sighing his relief—the relief at being rid of that horrible tug,
pull, grip on his heart. The danger was over. That was the feeling. They were
on dry land again.

 But at that moment Janey’s head came round the corner.

 “Darling—do you mind? I just want to go and say good-bye to the
doctor.”

 Hammond started up. “I’ll come with you.”

 “No, no!” she said. “Don’t bother. I’d rather
not. I’ll not be a minute.”

 And before he could answer she was gone. He had half a mind to run after her;
but instead he sat down again.

 Would she really not be long? What was the time now? Out came the watch; he
stared at nothing. That was rather queer of Janey, wasn’t it? Why
couldn’t she have told the stewardess to say good-bye for her? Why did
she have to go chasing after the ship’s doctor? She could have sent a
note from the hotel even if the affair had been urgent. Urgent? Did
it—could it mean that she had been ill on the voyage—she was
keeping something from him? That was it! He seized his hat. He was going off to
find that fellow and to wring the truth out of him at all costs. He thought
he’d noticed just something. She was just a touch too calm—too
steady. From the very first moment—

 The curtains rang. Janey was back. He jumped to his feet.

 “Janey, have you been ill on this voyage? You have!”

 “Ill?” Her airy little voice mocked him. She stepped over the rugs,
and came up close, touched his breast, and looked up at him.

 “Darling,” she said, “don’t frighten me. Of course I
haven’t! Whatever makes you think I have? Do I look ill?”

 But Hammond didn’t see her. He only felt that she was looking at him and
that there was no need to worry about anything. She was here to look after
things. It was all right. Everything was.

 The gentle pressure of her hand was so calming that he put his over hers to
hold it there. And she said:

 “Stand still. I want to look at you. I haven’t seen you yet.
You’ve had your beard beautifully trimmed, and you look—younger, I
think, and decidedly thinner! Bachelor life agrees with you.”

 “Agrees with me!” He groaned for love and caught her close again.
And again, as always, he had the feeling that he was holding something that
never was quite his—his. Something too delicate, too precious, that would
fly away once he let go.

 “For God’s sake let’s get off to the hotel so that we can be
by ourselves!” And he rang the bell hard for some one to look sharp with
the luggage.

  





   





 Walking down the wharf together she took his arm. He had her on his arm again.
And the difference it made to get into the cab after Janey—to throw the
red-and-yellow striped blanket round them both—to tell the driver to
hurry because neither of them had had any tea. No more going without his tea or
pouring out his own. She was back. He turned to her, squeezed her hand, and
said gently, teasingly, in the “special” voice he had for her:
“Glad to be home again, dearie?” She smiled; she didn’t even
bother to answer, but gently she drew his hand away as they came to the
brighter streets.

 “We’ve got the best room in the hotel,” he said. “I
wouldn’t be put off with another. And I asked the chambermaid to put in a
bit of a fire in case you felt chilly. She’s a nice, attentive girl. And
I thought now we were here we wouldn’t bother to go home to-morrow, but
spend the day looking round and leave the morning after. Does that suit you?
There’s no hurry, is there? The children will have you soon enough.... I
thought a day’s sight-seeing might make a nice break in your
journey—eh, Janey?”

 “Have you taken the tickets for the day after?” she asked.

 “I should think I have!” He unbuttoned his overcoat and took out
his bulging pocket-book. “Here we are! I reserved a first-class carriage
to Cooktown. There it is—‘Mr. and Mrs. John Hammond.’
I thought we might as well do ourselves comfortably, and we don’t want
other people butting in, do we? But if you’d like to stop here a bit
longer—?”

 “Oh, no!” said Janey quickly. “Not for the world! The day
after to-morrow, then. And the children—”

 But they had reached the hotel. The manager was standing in the broad,
brilliantly-lighted porch. He came down to greet them. A porter ran from the
hall for their boxes.

 “Well, Mr. Arnold, here’s Mrs. Hammond at last!”

 The manager led them through the hall himself and pressed the elevator-bell.
Hammond knew there were business pals of his sitting at the little hall tables
having a drink before dinner. But he wasn’t going to risk interruption;
he looked neither to the right nor the left. They could think what they
pleased. If they didn’t understand, the more fools they—and he
stepped out of the lift, unlocked the door of their room, and shepherded Janey
in. The door shut. Now, at last, they were alone together. He turned up the
light. The curtains were drawn; the fire blazed. He flung his hat on to the
huge bed and went towards her.

 But—would you believe it!—again they were interrupted. This time it
was the porter with the luggage. He made two journeys of it, leaving the door
open in between, taking his time, whistling through his teeth in the corridor.
Hammond paced up and down the room, tearing off his gloves, tearing off his
scarf. Finally he flung his overcoat on to the bedside.

 At last the fool was gone. The door clicked. Now they were alone. Said
Hammond: “I feel I’ll never have you to myself again. These cursed
people! Janey”—and he bent his flushed, eager gaze upon
her—“let’s have dinner up here. If we go down to the
restaurant we’ll be interrupted, and then there’s the confounded
music” (the music he’d praised so highly, applauded so loudly last
night!). “We shan’t be able to hear each other speak. Let’s
have something up here in front of the fire. It’s too late for tea.
I’ll order a little supper, shall I? How does that idea strike you?”

 “Do, darling!” said Janey. “And while you’re
away—the children’s letters—”

 “Oh, later on will do!” said Hammond.

 “But then we’d get it over,” said Janey. “And I’d
first have time to—”

 “Oh, I needn’t go down!” explained Hammond. “I’ll
just ring and give the order... you don’t want to send me away, do
you?”

 Janey shook her head and smiled.

 “But you’re thinking of something else. You’re worrying about
something,” said Hammond. “What is it? Come and sit here—come
and sit on my knee before the fire.”

 “I’ll just unpin my hat,” said Janey, and she went over to
the dressing-table. “A-ah!” She gave a little cry.

 “What is it?”

 “Nothing, darling. I’ve just found the children’s letters.
That’s all right! They will keep. No hurry now!” She turned to him,
clasping them. She tucked them into her frilled blouse. She cried quickly,
gaily: “Oh, how typical this dressing-table is of you!”

 “Why? What’s the matter with it?” said Hammond.

 “If it were floating in eternity I should say ‘John!’”
laughed Janey, staring at the big bottle of hair tonic, the wicker bottle of
eau-de-Cologne, the two hair-brushes, and a dozen new collars tied with pink
tape. “Is this all your luggage?”

 “Hang my luggage!” said Hammond; but all the same he liked being
laughed at by Janey. “Let’s talk. Let’s get down to things.
Tell me”—and as Janey perched on his knees he leaned back and drew
her into the deep, ugly chair—“tell me you’re really glad to
be back, Janey.”

 “Yes, darling, I am glad,” she said.

 But just as when he embraced her he felt she would fly away, so Hammond never
knew—never knew for dead certain that she was as glad as he was. How
could he know? Would he ever know? Would he always have this craving—this
pang like hunger, somehow, to make Janey so much part of him that there
wasn’t any of her to escape? He wanted to blot out everybody, everything.
He wished now he’d turned off the light. That might have brought her
nearer. And now those letters from the children rustled in her blouse. He could
have chucked them into the fire.

 “Janey,” he whispered.

 “Yes, dear?” She lay on his breast, but so lightly, so remotely.
Their breathing rose and fell together.

 “Janey!”

 “What is it?”

 “Turn to me,” he whispered. A slow, deep flush flowed into his
forehead. “Kiss me, Janey! You kiss me!”

 It seemed to him there was a tiny pause—but long enough for him to suffer
torture—before her lips touched his, firmly, lightly—kissing them
as she always kissed him, as though the kiss—how could he describe
it?—confirmed what they were saying, signed the contract. But that
wasn’t what he wanted; that wasn’t at all what he thirsted for. He
felt suddenly, horrible tired.

 “If you knew,” he said, opening his eyes, “what it’s
been like—waiting to-day. I thought the boat never would come in. There
we were, hanging about. What kept you so long?”

 She made no answer. She was looking away from him at the fire. The flames
hurried—hurried over the coals, flickered, fell.

 “Not asleep, are you?” said Hammond, and he jumped her up and down.

 “No,” she said. And then: “Don’t do that, dear. No, I
was thinking. As a matter of fact,” she said, “one of the
passengers died last night—a man. That’s what held us up. We
brought him in—I mean, he wasn’t buried at sea. So, of course, the
ship’s doctor and the shore doctor—”

 “What was it?” asked Hammond uneasily. He hated to hear of death.
He hated this to have happened. It was, in some queer way, as though he and
Janey had met a funeral on their way to the hotel.

 “Oh, it wasn’t anything in the least infectious!” said Janey.
She was speaking scarcely above her breath. “It was heart .”
A pause. “Poor fellow!” she said. “Quite young.” And
she watched the fire flicker and fall. “He died in my arms,” said
Janey.

 The blow was so sudden that Hammond thought he would faint. He couldn’t
move; he couldn’t breathe. He felt all his strength flowing—flowing
into the big dark chair, and the big dark chair held him fast, gripped him,
forced him to bear it.

 “What?” he said dully. “What’s that you say?”

 “The end was quite peaceful,” said the small voice. “He
just”—and Hammond saw her lift her gentle
hand—“breathed his life away at the end.” And her hand fell.

 “Who—else was there?” Hammond managed to ask.

 “Nobody. I was alone with him.”

 Ah, my God, what was she saying! What was she doing to him! This would kill
him! And all the while she spoke:

 “I saw the change coming and I sent the steward for the doctor, but the
doctor was too late. He couldn’t have done anything, anyway.”

 “But—why you , why you ?” moaned Hammond.

 At that Janey turned quickly, quickly searched his face.

 “You don’t mind , John, do you?” she asked. “You
don’t—It’s nothing to do with you and me.”

 Somehow or other he managed to shake some sort of smile at her. Somehow or
other he stammered: “No—go—on, go on! I want you to tell
me.”

 “But, John darling—”

 “Tell me, Janey!”

 “There’s nothing to tell,” she said, wondering. “He was
one of the first-class passengers. I saw he was very ill when he came on
board.... But he seemed to be so much better until yesterday. He had a severe
attack in the afternoon—excitement—nervousness, I think, about
arriving. And after that he never recovered.”

 “But why didn’t the stewardess—”

 “Oh, my dear—the stewardess!” said Janey. “What would
he have felt? And besides... he might have wanted to leave a message...
to—”

 “Didn’t he?” muttered Hammond. “Didn’t he say
anything?”

 “No, darling, not a word!” She shook her head softly. “All
the time I was with him he was too weak... he was too weak even to move a
finger....”

 Janey was silent. But her words, so light, so soft, so chill, seemed to hover
in the air, to rain into his breast like snow.

 The fire had gone red. Now it fell in with a sharp sound and the room was
colder. Cold crept up his arms. The room was huge, immense, glittering. It
filled his whole world. There was the great blind bed, with his coat flung
across it like some headless man saying his prayers. There was the luggage,
ready to be carried away again, anywhere, tossed into trains, carted on to
boats.

 ... “He was too weak. He was too weak to move a finger.” And yet he
died in Janey’s arms. She—who’d never—never once in all
these years—never on one single solitary occasion—

 No; he mustn’t think of it. Madness lay in thinking of it. No, he
wouldn’t face it. He couldn’t stand it. It was too much to bear!

 And now Janey touched his tie with her fingers. She pinched the edges of the
tie together.

 “You’re not—sorry I told you, John darling? It hasn’t
made you sad? It hasn’t spoilt our evening—our being alone
together?”

 But at that he had to hide his face. He put his face into her bosom and his
arms enfolded her.

 Spoilt their evening! Spoilt their being alone together! They would never be
alone together again.