THE CORSICAN BANDIT
    

      The road ascended gently through the forest of Aitone. The large pines
      formed a solemn dome above our heads, and that mysterious sound made by
      the wind in the trees sounded like the notes of an organ.
    

      After walking for three hours, there was a clearing, and then at intervals
      an enormous pine umbrella, and then we suddenly came to the edge of the
      forest, some hundred meters below, the pass leading to the wild valley of
      Niolo.
    

      On the two projecting heights which commanded a view of this pass, some
      old trees, grotesquely twisted, seemed to have mounted with painful
      efforts, like scouts sent in advance of the multitude in the rear. When we
      turned round, we saw the entire forest stretched beneath our feet, like a
      gigantic basin of verdure, inclosed by bare rocks whose summits seemed to
      reach the sky.
    

      We resumed our walk, and, ten minutes later, found ourselves in the pass.
    

      Then I beheld a remarkable landscape. Beyond another forest stretched a
      valley, but a valley such as I had never seen before; a solitude of stone,
      ten leagues long, hollowed out between two high mountains, without a field
      or a tree to be seen. This was the Niolo valley, the fatherland of
      Corsican liberty, the inaccessible citadel, from which the invaders had
      never been able to drive out the mountaineers.
    

      My companion said to me: “This is where all our bandits have taken
      refuge?”
    

      Ere long we were at the further end of this gorge, so wild, so
      inconceivably beautiful.
    

      Not a blade of grass, not a plant-nothing but granite. As far as our eyes
      could reach, we saw in front of us a desert of glittering stone, heated
      like an oven by a burning sun, which seemed to hang for that very purpose
      right above the gorge. When we raised our eyes towards the crests, we
      stood dazzled and stupefied by what we saw. They looked like a festoon of
      coral; all the summits are of porphyry; and the sky overhead was violet,
      purple, tinged with the coloring of these strange mountains. Lower down,
      the granite was of scintillating gray, and seemed ground to powder beneath
      our feet. At our right, along a long and irregular course, roared a
      tumultuous torrent. And we staggered along under this heat, in this light,
      in this burning, arid, desolate valley cut by this torrent of turbulent
      water which seemed to be ever hurrying onward, without fertilizing the
      rocks, lost in this furnace which greedily drank it up without being
      saturated or refreshed by it.
    

      But, suddenly, there was visible at our right a little wooden cross sunk
      in a little heap of stones. A man had been killed there; and I said to my
      companion.
    

      “Tell me about your bandits.”
    

      He replied:
    

      “I knew the most celebrated of them, the terrible St. Lucia. I will
      tell you his history.
    

      “His father was killed in a quarrel by a young man of the district,
      it is said; and St. Lucia was left alone with his sister. He was a weak,
      timid youth, small, often ill, without any energy. He did not proclaim
      vengeance against the assassin of his father. All his relatives came to
      see him, and implored of him to avenge his death; he remained deaf to
      their menaces and their supplications.
    

      “Then, following the old Corsican custom, his sister, in her
      indignation carried away his black clothes, in order that he might not
      wear mourning for a dead man who had not been avenged. He was insensible
      to even this affront, and rather than take down from the rack his father's
      gun, which was still loaded, he shut himself up, not daring to brave the
      looks of the young men of the district.
    

      “He seemed to have even forgotten the crime, and lived with his
      sister in the seclusion of their dwelling.
    

      “But, one day, the man who was suspected of having committed the
      murder, was about to get married. St. Lucia did not appear to be moved by
      this news, but, out of sheer bravado, doubtless, the bridegroom, on his
      way to the church, passed before the house of the two orphans.
    

      “The brother and the sister, at their window, were eating frijoles,
      when the young man saw the bridal procession going by. Suddenly he began
      to tremble, rose to his feet without uttering a word, made the sign of the
      cross, took the gun which was hanging over the fireplace, and went out.
    

      “When he spoke of this later on, he said: 'I don't know what was the
      matter with me; it was like fire in my blood; I felt that I must do it,
      that, in spite of everything, I could not resist, and I concealed the gun
      in a cave on the road to Corte.
    

      “An hour later, he came back, with nothing in his hand, and with his
      habitual air of sad weariness. His sister believed that there was nothing
      further in his thoughts.
    

      “But when night fell he disappeared.
    

      “His enemy had, the same evening, to repair to Corte on foot,
      accompanied by his two groomsmen.
    

      “He was walking along, singing as he went, when St. Lucia stood
      before him, and looking straight in the murderer's face, exclaimed: 'Now
      is the time!' and shot him point-blank in the chest.
    

      “One of the men fled; the other stared at, the young man, saying:
    

      “'What have you done, St. Lucia?' and he was about to hasten to
      Corte for help, when St. Lucia said in a stern tone:
    

      “'If you move another step, I'll shoot you in the leg.'
    

      “The other, aware of his timidity hitherto, replied: 'You would not
      dare to do it!' and was hurrying off when he fell instantaneously, his
      thigh shattered by a bullet.
    

      “And St. Lucia, coming over to where he lay, said:
    

      “'I am going to look at your wound; if it is not serious, I'll leave
      you there; if it is mortal I'll finish you off.”
    

      “He inspected the wound, considered it mortal, and slowly reloading
      his gun, told the wounded man to say a prayer, and shot him through the
      head.
    

      “Next day he was in the mountains.
    

      “And do you know what this St. Lucia did after this?
    

      “All his family were arrested by the gendarmes. His uncle, the cure,
      who was suspected of having incited him to this deed of vengeance, was
      himself put in prison, and accused by the dead man's relatives. But he
      escaped, took a gun in his turn, and went to join his nephew in the brush.
    

      “Next, St. Lucia killed, one after the other, his uncle's accusers,
      and tore out their eyes to teach the others never to state what they had
      seen with their eyes.
    

      “He killed all the relatives, all the connections of his enemy's
      family. He slew during his life fourteen gendarmes, burned down the houses
      of his adversaries, and was, up to the day of his death, the most terrible
      of all the bandits whose memory we have preserved.”
    

      The sun disappeared behind Monte Cinto and the tall shadow of the granite
      mountain went to sleep on the granite of the valley. We quickened our pace
      in order to reach before night the little village of Albertaccio, nothing
      but a pile of stones welded into the stone flanks of a wild gorge. And I
      said as I thought of the bandit:
    

      “What a terrible custom your vendetta is!”
    

      My companion answered with an air of resignation:
    

      “What would you have? A man must do his duty!”
    







      THE GRAVE
    

      The seventeenth of July, one thousand eight hundred and eighty-three, at
      half-past two in the morning, the watchman in the cemetery of Besiers, who
      lived in a small cottage on the edge of this field of the dead, was
      awakened by the barking of his dog, which was shut up in the kitchen.
    

      Going down quickly, he saw the animal sniffing at the crack of the door
      and barking furiously, as if some tramp had been sneaking about the house.
      The keeper, Vincent, therefore took his gun and went out.
    

      His dog, preceding him, at once ran in the direction of the Avenue General
      Bonnet, stopping short at the monument of Madame Tomoiseau.
    

      The keeper, advancing cautiously, soon saw a faint light on the side of
      the Avenue Malenvers, and stealing in among the graves, he came upon a
      horrible act of profanation.
    

      A man had dug up the coffin of a young woman who had been buried the
      evening before and was dragging the corpse out of it.
    

      A small dark lantern, standing on a pile of earth, lighted up this hideous
      scene.
    

      Vincent sprang upon the wretch, threw him to the ground, bound his hands
      and took him to the police station.
    

      It was a young, wealthy and respected lawyer in town, named Courbataille.
    

      He was brought into court. The public prosecutor opened the case by
      referring to the monstrous deeds of the Sergeant Bertrand.
    

      A wave of indignation swept over the courtroom. When the magistrate sat
      down the crowd assembled cried: “Death! death!” With
      difficulty the presiding judge established silence.
    

      Then he said gravely:
    

      “Defendant, what have you to say in your defense?”
    

      Courbataille, who had refused counsel, rose. He was a handsome fellow,
      tall, brown, with a frank face, energetic manner and a fearless eye.
    

      Paying no attention to the whistlings in the room, he began to speak in a
      voice that was low and veiled at first, but that grew more firm as he
      proceeded.
    

      “Monsieur le President, gentlemen of the jury: I have very little to
      say. The woman whose grave I violated was my sweetheart. I loved her.
    

      “I loved her, not with a sensual love and not with mere tenderness
      of heart and soul, but with an absolute, complete love, with an
      overpowering passion.
    

      “Hear me:
    

      “When I met her for the first time I felt a strange sensation. It
      was not astonishment nor admiration, nor yet that which is called love at
      first sight, but a feeling of delicious well-being, as if I had been
      plunged into a warm bath. Her gestures seduced me, her voice enchanted me,
      and it was with infinite pleasure that I looked upon her person. It seemed
      to me as if I had seen her before and as if I had known her a long time.
      She had within her something of my spirit.
    

      “She seemed to me like an answer to a cry uttered by my soul, to
      that vague and unceasing cry with which we call upon Hope during our whole
      life.
    

      “When I knew her a little better, the mere thought of seeing her
      again filled me with exquisite and profound uneasiness; the touch of her
      hand in mine was more delightful to me than anything that I had imagined;
      her smile filled me with a mad joy, with the desire to run, to dance, to
      fling myself upon the ground.
    

      “So we became lovers.
    

      “Yes, more than that: she was my very life. I looked for nothing
      further on earth, and had no further desires. I longed for nothing
      further.
    

      “One evening, when we had gone on a somewhat long walk by the river,
      we were overtaken by the rain, and she caught cold. It developed into
      pneumonia the next day, and a week later she was dead.
    

      “During the hours of her suffering astonishment and consternation
      prevented my understanding and reflecting upon it, but when she was dead I
      was so overwhelmed by blank despair that I had no thoughts left. I wept.
    

      “During all the horrible details of the interment my keen and wild
      grief was like a madness, a kind of sensual, physical grief.
    

      “Then when she was gone, when she was under the earth, my mind at
      once found itself again, and I passed through a series of moral sufferings
      so terrible that even the love she had vouchsafed to me was dear at that
      price.
    

      “Then the fixed idea came to me: I shall not see her again.
    

      “When one dwells on this thought for a whole day one feels as if he
      were going mad. Just think of it! There is a woman whom you adore, a
      unique woman, for in the whole universe there is not a second one like
      her. This woman has given herself to you and has created with you the
      mysterious union that is called Love. Her eye seems to you more vast than
      space, more charming than the world, that clear eye smiling with her
      tenderness. This woman loves you. When she speaks to you her voice floods
      you with joy.
    

      “And suddenly she disappears! Think of it! She disappears, not only
      for you, but forever. She is dead. Do you understand what that means?
      Never, never, never, not anywhere will she exist any more. Nevermore will
      that eye look upon anything again; nevermore will that voice, nor any
      voice like it, utter a word in the same way as she uttered it.
    

      “Nevermore will a face be born that is like hers. Never, never! The
      molds of statues are kept; casts are kept by which one can make objects
      with the same outlines and forms. But that one body and that one face will
      never more be born again upon the earth. And yet millions and millions of
      creatures will be born, and more than that, and this one woman will not
      reappear among all the women of the future. Is it possible? It drives one
      mad to think of it.
    

      “She lived for twenty years, not more, and she has disappeared
      forever, forever, forever! She thought, she smiled, she loved me. And now
      nothing! The flies that die in the autumn are as much as we are in this
      world. And now nothing! And I thought that her body, her fresh body, so
      warm, so sweet, so white, so lovely, would rot down there in that box
      under the earth. And her soul, her thought, her love—where is it?
    

      “Not to see her again! The idea of this decomposing body, that I
      might yet recognize, haunted me. I wanted to look at it once more.
    

      “I went out with a spade, a lantern and a hammer; I jumped over the
      cemetery wall and I found the grave, which had not yet been closed
      entirely; I uncovered the coffin and took up a board. An abominable odor,
      the stench of putrefaction, greeted my nostrils. Oh, her bed perfumed with
      orris!
    

      “Yet I opened the coffin, and, holding my lighted lantern down into
      it I saw her. Her face was blue, swollen, frightful. A black liquid had
      oozed out of her mouth.
    

      “She! That was she! Horror seized me. But I stretched out my arm to
      draw this monstrous face toward me. And then I was caught.
    

      “All night I have retained the foul odor of this putrid body, the
      odor of my well beloved, as one retains the perfume of a woman after a
      love embrace.
    

      “Do with me what you will.”
    

      A strange silence seemed to oppress the room. They seemed to be waiting
      for something more. The jury retired to deliberate.
    

      When they came back a few minutes later the accused showed no fear and did
      not even seem to think.
    

      The president announced with the usual formalities that his judges
      declared him to be not guilty.
    

      He did not move and the room applauded.
    

   The Grave appeared in Gil Blas, July 29, 1883, under the signature
   of “Maufrigneuse.”
 







      ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES, Vol. 13.
    

              GUY DE MAUPASSANT
             ORIGINAL SHORT STORIES
               Translated by
            ALBERT M. C. McMASTER, B.A.
             A. E. HENDERSON, B.A.
             MME. QUESADA and Others








      VOLUME XIII.