THE SLEEPER.

 At midnight in the month of June,
     I stand beneath the mystic moon.
     An opiate vapour, dewy, dim,
     Exhales from out her golden rim,
     And, softly dripping, drop by drop,
     Upon the quiet mountain top.
     Steals drowsily and musically
     Into the univeral valley.
     The rosemary nods upon the grave;
     The lily lolls upon the wave;
     Wrapping the fog about its breast,
     The ruin moulders into rest;
     Looking like Lethe, see! the lake
     A conscious slumber seems to take,
     And would not, for the world, awake.
     All Beauty sleeps!—and lo! where lies
     (Her easement open to the skies)
     Irene, with her Destinies!

     Oh, lady bright! can it be right—
     This window open to the night?
     The wanton airs, from the tree-top,
     Laughingly through the lattice drop—
     The bodiless airs, a wizard rout,
     Flit through thy chamber in and out,
     And wave the curtain canopy
     So fitfully—so fearfully—
     Above the closed and fringed lid
     ‘Neath which thy slumb’ring sould lies hid,
     That o’er the floor and down the wall,
     Like ghosts the shadows rise and fall!
     Oh, lady dear, hast thous no fear?
     Why and what art thou dreaming here?
     Sure thou art come p’er far-off seas,
     A wonder to these garden trees!
     Strange is thy pallor! strange thy dress!
     Strange, above all, thy length of tress,
     And this all solemn silentness!

     The lady sleeps! Oh, may her sleep,
     Which is enduring, so be deep!
     Heaven have her in its sacred keep!
     This chamber changed for one more holy,
     This bed for one more melancholy,
     I pray to God that she may lie
     Forever with unopened eye,
     While the dim sheeted ghosts go by!

     My love, she sleeps! Oh, may her sleep,
     As it is lasting, so be deep!
     Soft may the worms about her creep!
     Far in the forest, dim and old,
     For her may some tall vault unfold—
     Some vault that oft hath flung its black
     And winged pannels fluttering back,
     Triumphant, o’er the crested palls,
     Of her grand family funerals—
     Some sepulchre, remote, alone,
     Against whose portal she hath thrown,
     In childhood, many an idle stone—
     Some tomb fromout whose sounding door
     She ne’er shall force an echo more,
     Thrilling to think, poor child of sin!
     It was the dead who groaned within.

 1845.

 BRIDAL BALLAD.

     THE ring is on my hand,
         And the wreath is on my brow;
     Satins and jewels grand
     Are all at my command,
         And I am happy now.

     And my lord he loves me well;
         But, when first he breathed his vow,
     I felt my bosom swell—
     For the words rang as a knell,
     And the voice seemed his who fell
     In the battle down the dell,
         And who is happy now.

     But he spoke to re-asure me,
         And he kissed my pallid brow,
     While a reverie came o’re me,
     And to the church-yard bore me,
     And I sighed to him before me,
     Thinking him dead D’Elormie,
         “Oh, I am happy now!”

     And thus the words were spoken,
         And this the plighted vow,
     And, though my faith be broken,
     And, though my heart be broken,
     Behold the golden token
         That proves me happy now!

     Would God I could awaken!
         For I dream I know not how,
     And my soul is sorely shaken
     Lest an evil step be taken,—
     Lest the dead who is forsaken
         May not be happy now.

 1845. 

  









 NOTES

 1. “The Raven” was first published on the 29th January, 1845,
      in the New York “Evening Mirror"-a paper its author was then
      assistant editor of. It was prefaced by the following words, understood to
      have been written by N. P. Willis: “We are permitted to copy (in
      advance of publication) from the second number of the “American
      Review,” the following remarkable poem by Edgar Poe. In our opinion,
      it is the most effective single example of ‘fugitive poetry’
      ever published in this country, and unsurpassed in English poetry for
      subtle conception, masterly ingenuity of versification, and consistent
      sustaining of imaginative lift and ‘pokerishness.’ It is one
      of those ‘dainties bred in a book’ which we feed on. It will
      stick to the memory of everybody who reads it.” In the February
      number of the “American Review” the poem was published as by
      “Quarles,” and it was introduced by the following note,
      evidently suggested if not written by Poe himself.

 [“The following lines from a correspondent-besides the deep, quaint
      strain of the sentiment, and the curious introduction of some ludicrous
      touches amidst the serious and impressive, as was doubtless intended by
      the author-appears to us one of the most felicitous specimens of unique
      rhyming which has for some time met our eye. The resources of English
      rhythm for varieties of melody, measure, and sound, producing
      corresponding diversities of effect, having been thoroughly studied, much
      more perceived, by very few poets in the language. While the classic
      tongues, especially the Greek, possess, by power of accent, several
      advantages for versification over our own, chiefly through greater
      abundance of spondaic: feet, we have other and very great advantages of
      sound by the modern usage of rhyme. Alliteration is nearly the only effect
      of that kind which the ancients had in common with us. It will be seen
      that much of the melody of ‘The Raven’ arises from
      alliteration, and the studious use of similar sounds in unusual places. In
      regard to its measure, it may be noted that if all the verses were like
      the second, they might properly be placed merely in short lines, producing
      a not uncommon form; but the presence in all the others of one line-mostly
      the second in the verse” (stanza?)—“which flows
      continuously, with only an aspirate pause in the middle, like that before
      the short line in the Sapphic Adonic, while the fifth has at the middle
      pause no similarity of sound with any part besides, gives the
      versification an entirely different effect. We could wish the capacities
      of our noble language in prosody were better understood.”—ED.
      “Am. Rev.”]

 2. The bibliographical history of “The Bells” is curious. The
      subject, and some lines of the original version, having been suggested by
      the poet’s friend, Mrs. Shew, Poe, when he wrote out the first draft
      of the poem, headed it, “The Bells, By Mrs. M. A. Shew.” This
      draft, now the editor’s property, consists of only seventeen lines,
      and read thus:

 I.

     The bells!-ah, the bells!
     The little silver bells!
     How fairy-like a melody there floats
     From their throats—
     From their merry little throats—
     From the silver, tinkling throats
     Of the bells, bells, bells—
     Of the bells!

                       II.

     The bells!-ah, the bells!

     The heavy iron bells!
     How horrible a monody there floats
     From their throats—
     From their deep-toned throats—
     From their melancholy throats!
     How I shudder at the notes Of the bells, bells, bells—
     Of the bells!

 In the autumn of 1848 Poe added another line to this poem, and sent it to
      the editor of the “Union Magazine.” It was not published. So,
      in the following February, the poet forwarded to the same periodical a
      much enlarged and altered transcript. Three months having elapsed without
      publication, another revision of the poem, similar to the current version,
      was sent, and in the following October was published in the “Union
      Magazine.”

 3. This poem was first published in Colton’s “American Review”
      for December, 1847, as “To—Ulalume: a Ballad.” Being
      reprinted immediately in the “Home Journal,” it was copied
      into various publications with the name of the editor, N. P. Willis,
      appended, and was ascribed to him. When first published, it contained the
      following additional stanza which Poe subsequently, at the suggestion of
      Mrs. Whitman, wisely suppressed:

 Said we then—we two, then—“Ah, can it
     Have been that the woodlandish ghouls—
     The pitiful, the merciful ghouls—
     To bar up our path and to ban it
     From the secret that lies in these wolds—
     Had drawn up the spectre of a planet
     From the limbo of lunary souls—
     This sinfully scintillant planet
     From the Hell of the planetary souls?”

 4. “To Helen!” (Mrs. S. Helen Whitman) was not published until
      November, 1848, although written several months earlier. It first appeared
      in the “Union Magazine,” and with the omission, contrary to
      the knowledge or desire of Poe, of the line, “Oh, God! oh, Heaven—how
      my heart beats in coupling those two words.”

 5. “Annabel Lee” was written early in 1849, and is evidently
      an expression of the poet’s undying love for his deceased bride,
      although at least one of his lady admirers deemed it a response to her
      admiration. Poe sent a copy of the ballad to the “Union Magazine,”
      in which publication it appeared in January, 1850, three months after the
      author’s death. While suffering from “hope deferred” as
      to its fate, Poe presented a copy of “Annabel Lee” to the
      editor of the “Southern Literary Messenger,” who published it
      in the November number of his periodical, a month after Poe’s death.
      In the meantime the poet’s own copy, left among his papers, passed
      into the hands of the person engaged to edit his works, and he quoted the
      poem in an obituary of Poe, in the New York “Tribune,” before
      any one else had an opportunity of publishing it.

 6. “A Valentine,” one of three poems addressed to Mrs. Osgood,
      appears to have been written early in 1846.

 7. “An Enigma,” addressed to Mrs. Sarah Anna Lewis (“Stella”),
      was sent to that lady in a letter, in November, 1847, and the following
      March appeared in Sartain’s “Union Magazine.”

 8. The sonnet, “To My Mother” (Maria Clemm), was sent for
      publication to the short-lived “Flag of our Union,” early in
      1849,’ but does not appear to have been issued until after its
      author’s death, when it appeared in the “Leaflets of Memory”
      for 1850.

 9. “For Annie” was first published in the “Flag of our
      Union,” in the spring of 1849. Poe, annoyed at some misprints in
      this issue, shortly afterwards caused a corrected copy to be inserted in
      the “Home Journal.”

 10. “To F——” (Frances Sargeant Osgood) appeared in
      the “Broadway journal” for April, 1845. These lines are but
      slightly varied from those inscribed “To Mary,” in the “Southern
      Literary Messenger” for July, 1835, and subsequently republished,
      with the two stanzas transposed, in “Graham’s Magazine”
      for March, 1842, as “To One Departed.”

 11. “To F——s S. O—d,” a portion of the poet’s
      triune tribute to Mrs. Osgood, was published in the “Broadway
      Journal” for September, 1845. The earliest version of these lines
      appeared in the “Southern Literary Messenger” for September,
      1835, as “Lines written in an Album,” and was addressed to
      Eliza White, the proprietor’s daughter. Slightly revised, the poem
      reappeared in Burton’s “Gentleman’s Magazine” for
      August, 1839, as “To—.”

 12. Although “Eldorado” was published during Poe’s
      lifetime, in 1849, in the “Flag of our Union,” it does not
      appear to have ever received the author’s finishing touches.

  

  









 POEMS OF MANHOOD