THE CHILD
    

      Lemonnier had remained a widower with one child. He had loved his wife
      devotedly, with a tender and exalted love, without a slip, during their
      entire married life. He was a good, honest man, perfectly simple, sincere,
      without suspicion or malice.
    

      He fell in love with a poor neighbor, proposed and was accepted. He was
      making a very comfortable living out of the wholesale cloth business, and
      he did not for a minute suspect that the young girl might have accepted
      him for anything else but himself.
    

      She made him happy. She was everything to him; he only thought of her,
      looked at her continually, with worshiping eyes. During meals he would
      make any number of blunders, in order not to have to take his eyes from
      the beloved face; he would pour the wine in his plate and the water in the
      salt-cellar, then he would laugh like a child, repeating:
    

      “You see, I love you too much; that makes me crazy.”
    

      She would smile with a calm and resigned look; then she would look away,
      as though embarrassed by the adoration of her husband, and try to make him
      talk about something else; but he would take her hand under the table and
      he would hold it in his, whispering:
    

      “My little Jeanne, my darling little Jeanne!”
    

      She sometimes lost patience and said:
    

      “Come, come, be reasonable; eat and let me eat.”
    

      He would sigh and break off a mouthful of bread, which he would then chew
      slowly.
    

      For five years they had no children. Then suddenly she announced to him
      that this state of affairs would soon cease. He was wild with joy. He no
      longer left her for a minute, until his old nurse, who had brought him up
      and who often ruled the house, would push him out and close the door
      behind him, in order to compel him to go out in the fresh air.
    

      He had grown very intimate with a young man who had known his wife since
      childhood, and who was one of the prefect's secretaries. M. Duretour would
      dine three times a week with the Lemonniers, bringing flowers to madame,
      and sometimes a box at the theater; and often, at the end of the dinner,
      Lemonnier, growing tender, turning towards his wife, would explain:
      “With a companion like you and a friend like him, a man is
      completely happy on earth.”
    

      She died in childbirth. The shock almost killed him. But the sight of the
      child, a poor, moaning little creature, gave him courage.
    

      He loved it with a passionate and sorrowful love, with a morbid love in
      which stuck the memory of death, but in which lived something of his
      worship for the dead mother. It was the flesh of his wife, her being
      continued, a sort of quintessence of herself. This child was her very life
      transferred to another body; she had disappeared that it might exist, and
      the father would smother it in with kisses. But also, this child had
      killed her; he had stolen this beloved creature, his life was at the cost
      of hers. And M. Lemonnier would place his son in the cradle and would sit
      down and watch him. He would sit this way by the hour, looking at him,
      dreaming of thousands of things, sweet or sad. Then, when the little one
      was asleep, he would bend over him and sob.
    

      The child grew. The father could no longer spend an hour away from him; he
      would stay near him, take him out for walks, and himself dress him, wash
      him, make him eat. His friend, M. Duretour, also seemed to love the boy;
      he would kiss him wildly, in those frenzies of tenderness which are
      characteristic of parents. He would toss him in his arms, he would trot
      him on his knees, by the hour, and M. Lemonnier, delighted, would mutter:
    

      “Isn't he a darling? Isn't he a darling?”
    

      And M. Duretour would hug the child in his arms and tickle his neck with
      his mustache.
    

      Celeste, the old nurse, alone, seemed to have no tenderness for the little
      one. She would grow angry at his pranks, and seemed impatient at the
      caresses of the two men. She would exclaim:
    

      “How can you expect to bring a child up like that? You'll make a
      perfect monkey out of him.”
    

      Years went by, and Jean was nine years old. He hardly knew how to read; he
      had been so spoiled, and only did as he saw fit. He was willful, stubborn
      and quick-tempered. The father always gave in to him and let him have his
      own way. M. Duretour would always buy him all the toys he wished, and he
      fed him on cake and candies. Then Celeste would grow angry and exclaim:
    

      “It's a shame, monsieur, a shame. You are spoiling this child. But
      it will have to stop; yes, sir, I tell you it will have to stop, and
      before long, too.”
    

      M. Lemonnier would answer, smiling:
    

      “What can you expect? I love him too much, I can't resist him; you
      must get used to it.”
    

      Jean was delicate, rather. The doctor said that he was anaemic, prescribed
      iron, rare meat and broth.
    

      But the little fellow loved only cake and refused all other nourishment;
      and the father, in despair, stuffed him with cream-puffs and chocolate
      eclairs.
    

      One evening, as they were sitting down to supper, Celeste brought on the
      soup with an air of authority and an assurance which she did not usually
      have. She took off the cover and, dipping the ladle into the dish, she
      declared:
    

      “Here is some broth such as I have never made; the young one will
      have to take some this time.”
    

      M. Lemonnier, frightened, bent his head. He saw a storm brewing.
    

      Celeste took his plate, filled it herself and placed it in front of him.
    

      He tasted the soup and said:
    

      “It is, indeed, excellent.”
    

      The servant took the boy's plate and poured a spoonful of soup in it. Then
      she retreated a few steps and waited.
    

      Jean smelled the food and pushed his plate away with an expression of
      disgust. Celeste, suddenly pale, quickly stepped forward and forcibly
      poured a spoonful down the child's open mouth.
    

      He choked, coughed, sneezed, spat; howling, he seized his glass and threw
      it at his nurse. She received it full in the stomach. Then, exasperated,
      she took the young shaver's head under her arm and began pouring spoonful
      after spoonful of soup down his throat. He grew as red as a beet, and he
      would cough it up, stamping, twisting, choking, beating the air with his
      hands.
    

      At first the father was so surprised that he could not move. Then,
      suddenly, he rushed forward, wild with rage, seized the servant by the
      throat and threw her up against the wall stammering:
    

      “Out! Out! Out! you brute!”
    

      But she shook him off, and, her hair streaming down her back, her eyes
      snapping, she cried out:
    

      “What's gettin' hold of you? You're trying to thrash me because I am
      making this child eat soup when you are filling him with sweet stuff!”
    

      He kept repeating, trembling from head to foot:
    

      “Out! Get out-get out, you brute!”
    

      Then, wild, she turned to him and, pushing her face up against his, her
      voice trembling:
    

      “Ah!—you think-you think that you can treat me like that? Oh!
      no. And for whom?—for that brat who is not even yours. No, not
      yours! No, not yours—not yours! Everybody knows it, except yourself!
      Ask the grocer, the butcher, the baker, all of them, any one of them!”
    

      She was growling and mumbling, choked with passion; then she stopped and
      looked at him.
    

      He was motionless livid, his arms hanging by his sides. After a short
      pause, he murmured in a faint, shaky voice, instinct with deep feeling:
    

      “You say? you say? What do you say?”
    

      She remained silent, frightened by his appearance. Once more he stepped
      forward, repeating:
    

      “You say—what do you say?”
    

      Then in a calm voice, she answered:
    

      “I say what I know, what everybody knows.”
    

      He seized her and, with the fury of a beast, he tried to throw her down.
      But, although old, she was strong and nimble. She slipped under his arm,
      and running around the table once more furious, she screamed:
    

      “Look at him, just look at him, fool that you are! Isn't he the
      living image of M. Durefour? just look at his nose and his eyes! Are yours
      like that? And his hair! Is it like his mother's? I tell you that everyone
      knows it, everyone except yourself! It's the joke of the town! Look at
      him!”
    

      She went to the door, opened it, and disappeared.
    

      Jean, frightened, sat motionless before his plate of soup.
    

      At the end of an hour, she returned gently, to see how matters stood. The
      child, after doing away with all the cakes and a pitcher full of cream and
      one of syrup, was now emptying the jam-pot with his soup-spoon.
    

      The father had gone out.
    

      Celeste took the child, kissed him, and gently carried him to his room and
      put him to bed. She came back to the dining-room, cleared the table, put
      everything in place, feeling very uneasy all the time.
    

      Not a single sound could be heard throughout the house. She put her ear
      against her master's door. He seemed to be perfectly still. She put her
      eye to the keyhole. He was writing, and seemed very calm.
    

      Then she returned to the kitchen and sat down, ready for any emergency.
      She slept on a chair and awoke at daylight.
    

      She did the rooms as she had been accustomed to every morning; she swept
      and dusted, and, towards eight o'clock, prepared M. Lemonnier's breakfast.
    

      But she did not dare bring it to her master, knowing too well how she
      would be received; she waited for him to ring. But he did not ring. Nine
      o'clock, then ten o'clock went by.
    

      Celeste, not knowing what to think, prepared her tray and started up with
      it, her heart beating fast.
    

      She stopped before the door and listened. Everything was still. She
      knocked; no answer. Then, gathering up all her courage, she opened the
      door and entered. With a wild shriek, she dropped the breakfast tray which
      she had been holding in her hand.
    

      In the middle of the room, M. Lemonnier was hanging by a rope from a ring
      in the ceiling. His tongue was sticking out horribly. His right slipper
      was lying on the ground, his left one still on his foot. An upturned chair
      had rolled over to the bed.
    

      Celeste, dazed, ran away shrieking. All the neighbors crowded together.
      The physician declared that he had died at about midnight.
    

      A letter addressed to M. Duretdur was found on the table of the suicide.
      It contained these words:
    

      “I leave and entrust the child to you!”