THE ENLIGHTENMENTS OF PAGETT, M.P.
    

   “Because half a dozen grasshoppers under a fern make the field ring
   with their importunate chink while thousands of great cattle,
   reposed beneath the shadow of the British oak, chew the cud and are
   silent, pray do not imagine that those who make the noise are the
   only inhabitants of the field—that, of course, they are many in
   number or that, after all, they are other than the little,
   shrivelled, meagre, hopping, though loud and troublesome insects of
   the hour.”
               —Burke: “Reflections on the Revolution in France.”
 

      They were sitting in the veranda of “the splendid palace of an Indian
      Pro-Consul”; surrounded by all the glory and mystery of the immemorial
      East. In plain English it was a one-storied, ten-roomed, whitewashed,
      mud-roofed bungalow, set in a dry garden of dusty tamarisk trees and
      divided from the road by a low mud wall. The green parrots screamed
      overhead as they flew in battalions to the river for their morning drink.
      Beyond the wall, clouds of fine dust showed where the cattle and goats of
      the city were passing afield to graze. The remorseless white light of the
      winter sunshine of Northern India lay upon everything and improved
      nothing, from the whining Persian-wheel by the lawn-tennis court to the
      long perspective of level road and the blue, domed tombs of Mohammedan
      saints just visible above the trees.
    

      “A Happy New Year,” said Orde to his guest. “It's the first you've ever
      spent out of England, isn't it?”
     

      “Yes. 'Happy New Year,” said Pagett, smiling at the sunshine. “What a
      divine climate you have here! Just think of the brown cold fog hanging
      over London now!” And he rubbed his hands.
    

      It was more than twenty years since he had last seen Orde, his schoolmate,
      and their paths in the world had divided early. The one had quitted
      college to become a cog-wheel in the machinery of the great Indian
      Government; the other more blessed with goods, had been whirled into a
      similar position in the English scheme. Three successive elections had not
      affected Pagett's position with a loyal constituency, and he had grown
      insensibly to regard himself in some sort as a pillar of the Empire, whose
      real worth would be known later on. After a few years of conscientious
      attendance at many divisions, after newspaper battles innumerable and the
      publication of interminable correspondence, and more hasty oratory than in
      his calmer moments he cared to think upon, it occurred to him, as it had
      occurred to many of his fellows in Parliament, that a tour to India would
      enable him to sweep a larger lyre and address himself to the problems of
      Imperial administration with a firmer hand. Accepting, therefore, a
      general invitation extended to him by Orde some years before, Pagett bad
      taken ship to Karachi, and only overnight had been received with joy by
      the Deputy-Commissioner of Amara. They had sat late, discussing the
      changes and chances of twenty years, recalling the names of the dead, and
      weighing the futures of the living, as is the custom of men meeting after
      intervals of action.
    

      Next morning they smoked the after-breakfast pipe in the veranda, still
      regarding each other curiously, Pagett, in a light grey frock-coat and
      garments much too thin for the time of the year, and a puggried sun-hat
      carefully and wonderfully made, Orde in a shooting coat, riding breeches,
      brown cowhide boots with spurs, and a battered flax helmet. He had ridden
      some miles in the early morning to inspect a doubtful river dam. The men's
      faces differed as much as their attire. Orde's worn and wrinkled around
      the eyes, and grizzled at the temples, was the harder and more square of
      the two, and it was with something like envy that the owner looked at the
      comfortable outlines of Pagett's blandly receptive countenance, the clear
      skin, the untroubled eye, and the mobile, clean-shaved lips.
    

      “And this is India!” said Pagett for the twentieth time staring long and
      intently at the grey feathering of the tamarisks.
    

      “One portion of India only. It's very much like this for 300 miles in
      every direction. By the way, now that you have rested a little—I
      wouldn't ask the old question before—what d'you think of the
      country?”
     

      “'Tis the most pervasive country that ever yet was seen. I acquired
      several pounds of your country coming up from Karachi. The air is heavy
      with it, and for miles and miles along that distressful eternity of rail
      there's no horizon to show where air and earth separate.”
     

      “Yes. It isn't easy to see truly or far in India. But you had a decent
      passage out, hadn't you?”
     

      “Very good on the whole. Your Anglo-Indian may be unsympathetic about
      one's political views; but he has reduced ship life to a science.”
     

      “The Anglo-Indian is a political orphan, and if he's wise he won't be in a
      hurry to be adopted by your party grandmothers. But how were your
      companions, unsympathetic?”
     

      “Well, there was a man called Dawlishe, a judge somewhere in this country
      it seems, and a capital partner at whist by the way, and when I wanted to
      talk to him about the progress of India in a political sense (Orde hid a
      grin, which might or might not have been sympathetic), the National
      Congress movement, and other things in which, as a Member of Parliament,
      I'm of course interested, he shifted the subject, and when I once cornered
      him, he looked me calmly in the eye, and said: 'That's all Tommy rot. Come
      and have a game at Bull.' You may laugh; but that isn't the way to treat a
      great and important question; and, knowing who I was, well, I thought it
      rather rude, don't you know; and yet Dawlishe is a thoroughly good
      fellow.”
     

      “Yes; he's a friend of mine, and one of the straightest men I know. I
      suppose, like many Anglo-Indians, he felt it was hopeless to give you any
      just idea of any Indian question without the documents before you, and in
      this case the documents you want are the country and the people.”
     

      “Precisely. That was why I came straight to you, bringing an open mind to
      bear on things. I'm anxious to know what popular feeling in India is
      really like y'know, now that it has wakened into political life. The
      National Congress, in spite of Dawlishe, must have caused great excitement
      among the masses?”
     

      “On the contrary, nothing could be more tranquil than the state of popular
      feeling; and as to excitement, the people would as soon be excited over
      the 'Rule of Three' as over the Congress.”
     

      “Excuse me, Orde, but do you think you are a fair judge? Isn't the
      official Anglo-Indian naturally jealous of any external influences that
      might move the masses, and so much opposed to liberal ideas, truly liberal
      ideas, that he can scarcely be expected to regard a popular movement with
      fairness?”
     

      “What did Dawlishe say about Tommy Rot? Think a moment, old man. You and I
      were brought up together; taught by the same tutors, read the same books,
      lived the same life, and new languages, and work among new races; while
      you, more fortunate, remain at home. Why should I change my mind—our
      mind—because I change my sky? Why should I and the few hundred
      Englishmen in my service become unreasonable, prejudiced fossils, while
      you and your newer friends alone remain bright and open-minded? You surely
      don't fancy civilians are members of a Primrose League?”
     

      “Of course not, but the mere position of an English official gives him a
      point of view which cannot but bias his mind on this question.” Pagett
      moved his knee up and down a little uneasily as he spoke.
    

      “That sounds plausible enough, but, like more plausible notions on Indian
      matters, I believe it's a mistake. You'll find when you come to consult
      the unofficial Briton that our fault, as a class—I speak of the
      civilian now—is rather to magnify the progress that has been made
      toward liberal institutions. It is of English origin, such as it is, and
      the stress of our work since the Mutiny—only thirty years ago—has
      been in that direction. No, I think you will get no fairer or more
      dispassionate view of the Congress business than such men as I can give
      you. But I may as well say at once that those who know most of India, from
      the inside, are inclined to wonder at the noise our scarcely begun
      experiment makes in England.”
     

      “But surely the gathering together of Congress delegates is of itself a
      new thing.”
     

      “There's nothing new under the sun When Europe was a jungle half Asia
      flocked to the canonical conferences of Buddhism; and for centuries the
      people have gathered at Pun, Hurdwar, Trimbak, and Benares in immense
      numbers. A great meeting, what you call a mass meeting, is really one of
      the oldest and most popular of Indian institutions in this topsy-turvy
      land, and though they have been employed in clerical work for generations
      they have no practical knowledge of affairs. A ship's clerk is a useful
      person, but he is scarcely the captain; and an orderly room writer,
      however smart he may be, is not the colonel. You see, the writer class in
      India has never till now aspired to anything like command. It wasn't
      allowed to. The Indian gentleman, for thousands of years past, has
      resembled Victor Hugo's noble:
    

      “'Un vrai sire Chatelain Laisse ecrire Le vilain. Sa main digne Quand il
      signe Egratigne Le velin.'
    

      “And the little egratignures he most likes to make have been scored pretty
      deeply by the sword.”
     

      “But this is childish and mediaeval nonsense!”
     

      “Precisely; and from your, or rather our, point of view the pen is
      mightier than the sword. In this country it's otherwise. The fault lies in
      our Indian balances, not yet adjusted to civilized weights and measures.”
     

      “Well, at all events, this literary class represent the natural
      aspirations and wishes of the people at large, though it may not exactly
      lead them, and, in spite of all you say, Orde, I defy you to find a really
      sound English Radical who would not sympathize with those aspirations.”
     

      Pagett spoke with some warmth, and he had scarcely ceased when a
      well-appointed dog-cart turned into the compound gates, and Orde rose
      saying: “Here is Edwards, the Master of the Lodge I neglect so diligently,
      come to talk about accounts, I suppose.”
     

      As the vehicle drove up under the porch Pagett also rose, saying with the
      trained effusion born of much practice: “But this is also my friend, my
      old and valued friend Edwards. I'm delighted to see you. I knew you were
      in India, but not exactly where.”
     

      “Then it isn't accounts, Mr. Edwards,” said Orde, cheerily.
    

      “Why, no, sir; I heard Mr. Pagett was coming, and as our works were closed
      for the New Year I thought I would drive over and see him.”
     

      “A very happy thought. Mr. Edwards, you may not know, Orde, was a leading
      member of our Radical Club at Switchton when I was beginning political
      life, and I owe much to his exertions. There's no pleasure like meeting an
      old friend, except, perhaps, making a new one. I suppose, Mr. Edwards, you
      stick to the good old cause?”
     

      “Well, you see, sir, things are different out here. There's precious
      little one can find to say against the Government, which was the main of
      our talk at home, and them that do say things are not the sort o' people a
      man who respects himself would like to be mixed up with. There are no
      politics, in a manner of speaking, in India. It's all work.”
     

      “Surely you are mistaken, my good friend. Why I have come all the way from
      England just to see the working of this great National movement.”
     

      “I don't know where you're going to find the nation as moves to begin
      with, and then you'll be hard put to it to find what they are moving
      about. It's like this, sir,” said Edwards, who had not quite relished
      being called “my good friend.” “They haven't got any grievance—nothing
      to hit with, don't you see, sir; and then there's not much to hit against,
      because the Government is more like a kind of general Providence,
      directing an old-established state of things, than that at home, where
      there's something new thrown down for us to fight about every three
      months.”
     

      “You are probably, in your workshops, full of English mechanics, out of
      the way of learning what the masses think.”
     

      “I don't know so much about that. There are four of us English foremen,
      and between seven and eight hundred native fitters, smiths, carpenters,
      painters, and such like.”
     

      “And they are full of the Congress, of course?”
     

      “Never hear a word of it from year's end to year's end, and I speak the
      talk too. But I wanted to ask how things are going on at home—old
      Tyler and Brown and the rest?”
     

      “We will speak of them presently, but your account of the indifference of
      your men surprises me almost as much as your own. I fear you are a
      backslider from the good old doctrine, Edwards.” Pagett spoke as one who
      mourned the death of a near relative.
    

      “Not a bit, Sir, but I should be if I took up with a parcel of baboos,
      pleaders, and schoolboys, as never did a day's work in their lives, and
      couldn't if they tried. And if you was to poll us English railway men,
      mechanics, tradespeople, and the like of that all up and down the country
      from Peshawur to Calcutta, you would find us mostly in a tale together.
      And yet you'd know we're the same English you pay some respect to at home
      at 'lection time, and we have the pull o' knowing something about it.”
     

      “This is very curious, but you will let me come and see you, and perhaps
      you will kindly show me the railway works, and we will talk things over at
      leisure. And about all old friends and old times,” added Pagett, detecting
      with quick insight a look of disappointment in the mechanic's face.
    

      Nodding briefly to Orde, Edwards mounted his dog-cart and drove off.
    

      “It's very disappointing,” said the Member to Orde, who, while his friend
      discoursed with Edwards, had been looking over a bundle of sketches drawn
      on grey paper in purple ink, brought to him by a Chuprassee.
    

      “Don't let it trouble you, old chap,” 'said Orde, sympathetically. “Look
      here a moment, here are some sketches by the man who made the carved wood
      screen you admired so much in the dining-room, and wanted a copy of, and
      the artist himself is here too.”
     

      “A native?” said Pagett.
    

      “Of course,” was the reply, “Bishen Singh is his name, and he has two
      brothers to help him. When there is an important job to do, the three go
      into partnership, but they spend most of their time and all their money in
      litigation over an inheritance, and I'm afraid they are getting involved,
      Thoroughbred Sikhs of the old rock, obstinate, touchy, bigoted, and
      cunning, but good men for all that. Here is Bishen Singh—shall we
      ask him about the Congress?”
     

      But Bishen Singh, who approached with a respectful salaam, had never heard
      of it, and he listened with a puzzled face and obviously feigned interest
      to Orde's account of its aims and objects, finally shaking his vast white
      turban with great significance when he learned that it was promoted by
      certain pleaders named by Orde, and by educated natives. He began with
      labored respect to explain how he was a poor man with no concern in such
      matters, which were all under the control of God, but presently broke out
      of Urdu into familiar Punjabi, the mere sound of which had a rustic smack
      of village smoke-reek and plough-tail, as he denounced the wearers of
      white coats, the jugglers with words who filched his field from him, the
      men whose backs were never bowed in honest work; and poured ironical scorn
      on the Bengali. He and one of his brothers had seen Calcutta, and being at
      work there had Bengali carpenters given to them as assistants.
    

      “Those carpenters!” said Bishen Singh. “Black apes were more efficient
      workmates, and as for the Bengali babu—tchick!” The guttural click
      needed no interpretation, but Orde translated the rest, while Pagett gazed
      with interest at the wood-carver.
    

      “He seems to have a most illiberal prejudice against the Bengali,” said
      the M.P.
    

      “Yes, it's very sad that for ages outside Bengal there should be so bitter
      a prejudice. Pride of race, which also means race-hatred, is the plague
      and curse of India and it spreads far,” Orde pointed with his riding-whip
      to the large map of India on the veranda wall.
    

      “See! I begin with the North,” said he. “There's the Afghan, and, as a
      highlander, he despises all the dwellers in Hindoostan—with the
      exception of the Sikh, whom he hates as cordially as the Sikh hates him.
      The Hindu loathes Sikh and Afghan, and the Rajput—that's a little
      lower down across this yellow blot of desert—has a strong objection,
      to put it mildly, to the Maratha who, by the way, poisonously hates the
      Afghan. Let's go North a minute. The Sindhi hates everybody I've
      mentioned. Very good, we'll take less warlike races. The cultivator of
      Northern India domineers over the man in the next province, and the Behari
      of the Northwest ridicules the Bengali. They are all at one on that point.
      I'm giving you merely the roughest possible outlines of the facts, of
      course.”
     

      Bishen Singh, his clean cut nostrils still quivering, watched the large
      sweep of the whip as it traveled from the frontier, through Sindh, the
      Punjab and Rajputana, till it rested by the valley of the Jumna.
    

      “Hate—eternal and inextinguishable hate,” concluded Orde, flicking
      the lash of the whip across the large map from East to West as he sat
      down. “Remember Canning's advice to Lord Granville, 'Never write or speak
      of Indian things without looking at a map.'”
     

      Pagett opened his eyes, Orde resumed. “And the race-hatred is only a part
      of it. What's really the matter with Bishen Singh is class-hatred, which,
      unfortunately, is even more intense and more widely spread. That's one of
      the little drawbacks of caste, which some of your recent English writers
      find an impeccable system.”
     

      The wood-carver was glad to be recalled to the business of his craft, and
      his eyes shone as he received instructions for a carved wooden doorway for
      Pagett, which he promised should be splendidly executed and despatched to
      England in six months. It is an irrelevant detail, but in spite of Orde's
      reminders, fourteen months elapsed before the work was finished. Business
      over, Bishen Singh hung about, reluctant to take his leave, and at last
      joining his hands and approaching Orde with bated breath and whispering
      humbleness, said he had a petition to make. Orde's face suddenly lost all
      trace of expression. “Speak on, Bishen Singh,” said he, and the carver in
      a whining tone explained that his case against his brothers was fixed for
      hearing before a native judge and—here he dropped his voice still
      lower till he was summarily stopped by Orde, who sternly pointed to the
      gate with an emphatic Begone!
    

      Bishen Singh, showing but little sign of discomposure, salaamed
      respectfully to the friends and departed.
    

      Pagett looked inquiry; Orde, with complete recovery of his usual urbanity,
      replied: “It's nothing, only the old story, he wants his case to be tried
      by an English judge—they all do that—but when he began to hint
      that the other side were in improper relations with the native judge I had
      to shut him up. Gunga Ram, the man he wanted to make insinuations about,
      may not be very bright; but he's as honest as daylight on the bench. But
      that's just what one can't get a native to believe.”
     

      “Do you really mean to say these people prefer to have their cases tried
      by English judges?”
     

      “Why, certainly.”
     

      Pagett drew a long breath. “I didn't know that before.” At this point a
      phaeton entered the compound, and Orde rose with “Confound it, there's old
      Rasul Ali Khan come to pay one of his tiresome duty calls. I'm afraid we
      shall never get through our little Congress discussion.”
     

      Pagett was an almost silent spectator of the grave formalities of a visit
      paid by a punctilious old Mahommedan gentleman to an Indian official; and
      was much impressed by the distinction of manner and fine appearance of the
      Mohammedan landholder. When the exchange of polite banalities came to a
      pause, he expressed a wish to learn the courtly visitor's opinion of the
      National Congress.
    

      Orde reluctantly interpreted, and with a smile which even Mohammedan
      politeness could not save from bitter scorn, Rasul Ali Khan intimated that
      he knew nothing about it and cared still less. It was a kind of talk
      encouraged by the Government for some mysterious purpose of its own, and
      for his own part he wondered and held his peace.
    

      Pagett was far from satisfied with this, and wished to have the old
      gentleman's opinion on the propriety of managing all Indian affairs on the
      basis of an elective system.
    

      Orde did his best to explain, but it was plain the visitor was bored and
      bewildered. Frankly, he didn't think much of committees; they had a
      Municipal Committee at Lahore and had elected a menial servant, an
      orderly, as a member. He had been informed of this on good authority, and
      after that, committees had ceased to interest him. But all was according
      to the rule of Government, and, please God, it was all for the best.
    

      “What an old fossil it is!” cried Pagett, as Orde returned from seeing his
      guest to the door; “just like some old blue-blooded hidalgo of Spain. What
      does he really think of the Congress after all, and of the elective
      system?”
     

      “Hates it all like poison. When you are sure of a majority, election is a
      fine system; but you can scarcely expect the Mahommedans, the most
      masterful and powerful minority in the country, to contemplate their own
      extinction with joy. The worst of it is that he and his co-religionists,
      who are many, and the landed proprietors, also, of Hindu race, are
      frightened and put out by this election business and by the importance we
      have bestowed on lawyers, pleaders, writers, and the like, who have, up to
      now, been in abject submission to them. They say little, but after all
      they are the most important fagots in the great bundle of communities, and
      all the glib bunkum in the world would not pay for their estrangement.
      They have controlled the land.”
     

      “But I am assured that experience of local self-government in your
      municipalities has been most satisfactory, and when once the principle is
      accepted in your centres, don't you know, it is bound to spread, and these
      important—ah—people of yours would learn it like the rest. I
      see no difficulty at all,” and the smooth lips closed with the complacent
      snap habitual to Pagett, M.P., the “man of cheerful yesterdays and
      confident tomorrows.”
     

      Orde looked at him with a dreary smile.
    

      “The privilege of election has been most reluctantly withdrawn from scores
      of municipalities, others have had to be summarily suppressed, and,
      outside the Presidency towns, the actual work done has been badly
      performed. This is of less moment, perhaps—it only sends up the
      local death-rates—than the fact that the public interest in
      municipal elections, never very strong, has waned, and is waning, in spite
      of careful nursing on the part of Government servants.”
     

      “Can you explain this lack of interest?” said Pagett, putting aside the
      rest of Orde's remarks.
    

      “You may find a ward of the key in the fact that only one in every
      thousand of our population can spell. Then they are infinitely more
      interested in religion and caste questions than in any sort of politics.
      When the business of mere existence is over, their minds are occupied by a
      series of interests, pleasures, rituals, superstitions, and the like,
      based on centuries of tradition and usage. You, perhaps, find it hard to
      conceive of people absolutely devoid of curiosity, to whom the book, the
      daily paper, and the printed speech are unknown, and you would describe
      their life as blank. That's a profound mistake. You are in another land,
      another century, down on the bed-rock of society, where the family merely,
      and not the community, is all-important. The average Oriental cannot be
      brought to look beyond his clan. His life, too, is more complete and
      self-sufficing, and less sordid and low-thoughted than you might imagine.
      It is bovine and slow in some respects, but it is never empty. You and I
      are inclined to put the cart before the horse, and to forget that it is
      the man that is elemental, not the book. 'The corn and the cattle are all
      my care, And the rest is the will of God.' Why should such folk look up
      from their immemorially appointed round of duty and interests to meddle
      with the unknown and fuss with voting-papers. How would you, atop of all
      your interests care to conduct even one-tenth of your life according to
      the manners and customs of the Papuans, let's say? That's what it comes
      to.”
     

      “But if they won't take the trouble to vote, why do you anticipate that
      Mohammedans, proprietors, and the rest would be crushed by majorities of
      them?”
     

      Again Pagett disregarded the closing sentence.
    

      “Because, though the landholders would not move a finger on any purely
      political question, they could be raised in dangerous excitement by
      religious hatreds. Already the first note of this has been sounded by the
      people who are trying to get up an agitation on the cow-killing question,
      and every year there is trouble over the Mohammedan Muharrum processions.
    

      “But who looks after the popular rights, being thus unrepresented?”
     

      “The Government of Her Majesty the Queen, Empress of India, in which, if
      the Congress promoters are to be believed, the people have an implicit
      trust; for the Congress circular, specially prepared for rustic
      comprehension, says the movement is 'for the remission of tax, the
      advancement of Hindustan, and the strengthening of the British
      Government.' This paper is headed in large letters-'MAY THE PROSPERITY OF
      THE EMPIRE OF INDIA ENDURE.'”
     

      “Really!” said Pagett, “that shows some cleverness. But there are things
      better worth imitation in our English methods of—er—political
      statement than this sort of amiable fraud.”
     

      “Anyhow,” resumed Orde, “you perceive that not a word is said about
      elections and the elective principle, and the reticence of the Congress
      promoters here shows they are wise in their generation.”
     

      “But the elective principle must triumph in the end, and the little
      difficulties you seem to anticipate would give way on the introduction of
      a well-balanced scheme, capable of indefinite extension.”
     

      “But is it possible to devise a scheme which, always assuming that the
      people took any interest in it, without enormous expense, ruinous
      dislocation of the administration and danger to the public peace, can
      satisfy the aspirations of Mr. Hume and his following, and yet safeguard
      the interests of the Mahommedans, the landed and wealthy classes, the
      Conservative Hindus, the Eurasians, Parsees, Sikhs, Rajputs, native
      Christians, domiciled Europeans and others, who are each important and
      powerful in their way?”
     

      Pagett's attention, however, was diverted to the gate, where a group of
      cultivators stood in apparent hesitation.
    

      “Here are the twelve Apostles, by Jove—come straight out of
      Raffaele's cartoons,” said the M.P., with the fresh appreciation of a
      newcomer.
    

      Orde, loth to be interrupted, turned impatiently toward the villagers, and
      their leader, handing his long staff to one of his companions, advanced to
      the house.
    

      “It is old Jelbo, the Lumherdar, or head-man of Pind Sharkot, and a very
      intelligent man for a villager.”
     

      The Jat farmer had removed his shoes and stood smiling on the edge of the
      veranda. His strongly marked features glowed with russet bronze, and his
      bright eyes gleamed under deeply set brows, contracted by lifelong
      exposure to sunshine. His beard and moustache streaked with grey swept
      from bold cliffs of brow and cheek in the large sweeps one sees drawn by
      Michael Angelo, and strands of long black hair mingled with the
      irregularly piled wreaths and folds of his turban. The drapery of stout
      blue cotton cloth thrown over his broad shoulders and girt round his
      narrow loins, hung from his tall form in broadly sculptured folds, and he
      would have made a superb model for an artist in search of a patriarch.
    

      Orde greeted him cordially, and after a polite pause the countryman
      started off with a long story told with impressive earnestness. Orde
      listened and smiled, interrupting the speaker at times to argue and reason
      with him in a tone which Pagett could hear was kindly, and finally
      checking the flux of words was about to dismiss him, when Pagett suggested
      that he should be asked about the National Congress.
    

      But Jelbo had never heard of it. He was a poor man and such things, by the
      favor of his Honor, did not concern him.
    

      “What's the matter with your big friend that he was so terribly in
      earnest?” asked Pagett, when he had left.
    

      “Nothing much. He wants the blood of the people in the next village, who
      have had smallpox and cattle plague pretty badly, and by the help of a
      wizard, a currier, and several pigs have passed it on to his own village.
      'Wants to know if they can't be run in for this awful crime. It seems they
      made a dreadful charivari at the village boundary, threw a quantity of
      spell-bearing objects over the border, a buffalo's skull and other things;
      then branded a chamur—what you would call a currier—on his
      hinder parts and drove him and a number of pigs over into Jelbo's village.
      Jelbo says he can bring evidence to prove that the wizard directing these
      proceedings, who is a Sansi, has been guilty of theft, arson,
      cattle-killing, perjury and murder, but would prefer to have him punished
      for bewitching them and inflicting smallpox.”
     

      “And how on earth did you answer such a lunatic?”
     

      “Lunatic!—the old fellow is as sane as you or I; and he has some
      ground of complaint against those Sansis. I asked if he would like a
      native superintendent of police with some men to make inquiries, but he
      objected on the grounds the police were rather worse than smallpox and
      criminal tribes put together.”
     

      “Criminal tribes—er—I don't quite understand,” said Pagett.
    

      “We have in India many tribes of people who in the slack anti-British days
      became robbers, in various kind, and preyed on the people. They are being
      restrained and reclaimed little by little, and in time will become useful
      citizens, but they still cherish hereditary traditions of crime, and are a
      difficult lot to deal with. By the way what about the political rights of
      these folk under your schemes? The country people call them vermin, but I
      suppose they would be electors with the rest.”
     

      “Nonsense—special provision would be made for them in a
      well-considered electoral scheme, and they would doubtless be treated with
      fitting severity,” said Pagett, with a magisterial air.
    

      “Severity, yes—but whether it would be fitting is doubtful. Even
      those poor devils have rights, and, after all, they only practice what
      they have been taught.”
     

      “But criminals, Orde!”
     

      “Yes, criminals with codes and rituals of crime, gods and godlings of
      crime, and a hundred songs and sayings in praise of it. Puzzling, isn't
      it?”
     

      “It's simply dreadful. They ought to be put down at once. Are there many
      of them?”
     

      “Not more than about sixty thousand in this province, for many of the
      tribes broadly described as criminal are really vagabond and criminal only
      on occasion, while others are being settled and reclaimed. They are of
      great antiquity, a legacy from the past, the golden, glorious Aryan past
      of Max Muller, Birdwood and the rest of your spindrift philosophers.”
     

      An orderly brought a card to Orde, who took it with a movement of
      irritation at the interruption, and banded it to Pagett; a large card with
      a ruled border in red ink, and in the centre in schoolboy copper plate,
      Mr. Dma Nath. “Give salaam,” said the civilian, and there entered in haste
      a slender youth, clad in a closely fitting coat of grey homespun, tight
      trousers, patent-leather shoes, and a small black velvet cap. His thin
      cheek twitched, and his eyes wandered restlessly, for the young man was
      evidently nervous and uncomfortable, though striving to assume a free and
      easy air.
    

      “Your honor may perhaps remember me,” he said in English, and Orde scanned
      him keenly.
    

      “I know your face somehow. You belonged to the Shershah district I think,
      when I was in charge there?”
     

      “Yes, Sir, my father is writer at Shershah, and your honor gave me a prize
      when I was first in the Middle School examination five years ago. Since
      then I have prosecuted my studies, and I am now second year's student in
      the Mission College—”
     

      “Of course: you are Kedar Nath's son—the boy who said he liked
      geography better than play or sugar cakes, and I didn't believe you. How
      is your father getting on?”
     

      “He is well, and he sends his salaam, but his circumstances are depressed,
      and he also is down on his luck.”
     

      “You learn English idioms at the Mission College, it seems.”
     

      “Yes, sir, they are the best idioms, and my father ordered me to ask your
      honor to say a word for him to the present incumbent of your honor's
      shoes, the latchet of which he is not worthy to open, and who knows not
      Joseph; for things are different at Shershah now, and my father wants
      promotion.”
     

      “Your father is a good man, and I will do what I can for him.”
     

      At this point a telegram was handed to Orde, who, after glancing at it,
      said he must leave his young friend whom he introduced to Pagett, “a
      member of the English House of Commons who wishes to learn about India.”
     

      Orde had scarcely retired with his telegram when Pagett began:
    

      “Perhaps you can tell me something of the National Congress movement?”
     

      “Sir, it is the greatest movement of modern times, and one in which all
      educated men like us must join. All our students are for the Congress.”
     

      “Excepting, I suppose, Mahommedans, and the Christians?” said Pagett,
      quick to use his recent instruction.
    

      “These are some mere exceptions to the universal rule.”
     

      “But the people outside the College, the working classes, the
      agriculturists; your father and mother, for instance.”
     

      “My mother,” said the young man, with a visible effort to bring himself to
      pronounce the word, “has no ideas, and my father is not agriculturist, nor
      working class; he is of the Kayeth caste; but he had not the advantage of
      a collegiate education, and he does not know much of the Congress. It is a
      movement for the educated young-man”—connecting adjective and noun
      in a sort of vocal hyphen.
    

      “Ah, yes,” said Pagett, feeling he was a little off the rails, “and what
      are the benefits you expect to gain by it?”
     

      “Oh, sir, everything. England owes its greatness to Parliamentary
      institutions, and we should at once gain the same high position in scale
      of nations. Sir, we wish to have the sciences, the arts, the manufactures,
      the industrial factories, with steam engines, and other motive powers and
      public meetings, and debates. Already we have a debating club in
      connection with the college, and elect a Mr. Speaker. Sir, the progress
      must come. You also are a Member of Parliament and worship the great Lord
      Ripon,” said the youth, breathlessly, and his black eyes flashed as he
      finished his commaless sentences.
    

      “Well,” said Pagett, drily, “it has not yet occurred to me to worship his
      Lordship, although I believe he is a very worthy man, and I am not sure
      that England owes quite all the things you name to the House of Commons.
      You see, my young friend, the growth of a nation like ours is slow,
      subject to many influences, and if you have read your history aright”—
    

      “Sir. I know it all—all! Norman Conquest, Magna Charta, Runnymede,
      Reformation, Tudors, Stuarts, Mr. Milton and Mr. Burke, and I have read
      something of Mr. Herbert Spencer and Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall,'
      Reynolds' 'Mysteries of the Court,' and”—
    

      Pagett felt like one who had pulled the string of a shower-bath unawares,
      and hastened to stop the torrent with a question as to what particular
      grievances of the people of India the attention of an elected assembly
      should be first directed. But young Mr. Dma Nath was slow to
      particularize. There were many, very many demanding consideration. Mr.
      Pagett would like to hear of one or two typical examples. The Repeal of
      the Arms Act was at last named, and the student learned for the first time
      that a license was necessary before an Englishman could carry a gun in
      England. Then natives of India ought to be allowed to become Volunteer
      Riflemen if they chose, and the absolute equality of the Oriental with his
      European fellow-subject in civil status should be proclaimed on principle,
      and the Indian Army should be considerably reduced. The student was not,
      however, prepared with answers to Mr. Pagett's mildest questions on these
      points, and he returned to vague generalities, leaving the M.P. so much
      impressed with the crudity of his views that he was glad on Orde's return
      to say goodbye to his “very interesting” young friend.
    

      “What do you think of young India?” asked Orde.
    

      “Curious, very curious—and callow.”
     

      “And yet,” the civilian replied, “one can scarcely help sympathizing with
      him for his mere youth's sake. The young orators of the Oxford Union
      arrived at the same conclusions and showed doubtless just the same
      enthusiasm. If there were any political analogy between India and England,
      if the thousand races of this Empire were one, if there were any chance
      even of their learning to speak one language, if, in short, India were a
      Utopia of the debating-room, and not a real land, this kind of talk might
      be worth listening to, but it is all based on false analogy and ignorance
      of the facts.”
     

      “But he is a native and knows the facts.”
     

      “He is a sort of English schoolboy, but married three years, and the
      father of two weaklings, and knows less than most English schoolboys. You
      saw all he is and knows, and such ideas as he has acquired are directly
      hostile to the most cherished convictions of the vast majority of the
      people.”
     

      “But what does he mean by saying he is a student of a mission college? Is
      he a Christian?”
     

      “He meant just what he said, and he is not a Christian, nor ever will he
      be. Good people in America, Scotland and England, most of whom would never
      dream of collegiate education for their own sons, are pinching themselves
      to bestow it in pure waste on Indian youths. Their scheme is an oblique,
      subterranean attack on heathenism; the theory being that with the jam of
      secular education, leading to a University degree, the pill of moral or
      religious instruction may he coaxed down the heathen gullet.”
     

      “But does it succeed; do they make converts?”
     

      “They make no converts, for the subtle Oriental swallows the jam and
      rejects the pill; but the mere example of the sober, righteous, and godly
      lives of the principals and professors who are most excellent and devoted
      men, must have a certain moral value. Yet, as Lord Lansdowne pointed out
      the other day, the market is dangerously overstocked with graduates of our
      Universities who look for employment in the administration. An immense
      number are employed, but year by year the college mills grind out
      increasing lists of youths foredoomed to failure and disappointment, and
      meanwhile, trades, manufactures, and the industrial arts are neglected,
      and in fact regarded with contempt by our new literary mandarins in
      posse.”
     

      “But our young friend said he wanted steam-engines and factories,” said
      Pagett.
    

      “Yes, he would like to direct such concerns. He wants to begin at the top,
      for manual labor is held to be discreditable, and he would never defile
      his hands by the apprenticeship which the architects, engineers, and
      manufacturers of England cheerfully undergo; and he would be aghast to
      learn that the leading names of industrial enterprise in England belonged
      a generation or two since, or now belong, to men who wrought with their
      own hands. And, though he talks glibly of manufacturers, he refuses to see
      that the Indian manufacturer of the future will be the despised workman of
      the present. It was proposed, for example, a few weeks ago, that a certain
      municipality in this province should establish an elementary technical
      school for the sons of workmen. The stress of the opposition to the plan
      came from a pleader who owed all he had to a college education bestowed on
      him gratis by Government and missions. You would have fancied some fine
      old crusted Tory squire of the last generation was speaking. 'These
      people,' he said, 'want no education, for they learn their trades from
      their fathers, and to teach a workman's son the elements of mathematics
      and physical science would give him ideas above his business. They must be
      kept in their place, and it was idle to imagine that there was any science
      in wood or iron work.' And he carried his point. But the Indian workman
      will rise in the social scale in spite of the new literary caste.”
     

      “In England we have scarcely begun to realize that there is an industrial
      class in this country, yet, I suppose, the example of men, like Edwards
      for instance, must tell,” said Pagett, thoughtfully.
    

      “That you shouldn't know much about it is natural enough, for there are
      but few sources of information. India in this, as in other respects, is
      like a badly kept ledger—not written up to date. And men like
      Edwards are, in reality, missionaries, who by precept and example are
      teaching more lessons than they know. Only a few, however, of their crowds
      of subordinates seem to care to try to emulate them, and aim at individual
      advancement; the rest drop into the ancient Indian caste groove.”
     

      “How do you mean?” asked Pagett.
    

      “Well, it is found that the new railway and factory workmen, the fitter,
      the smith, the engine-driver, and the rest are already forming separate
      hereditary castes. You may notice this down at Jamalpur in Bengal, one of
      the oldest railway centres; and at other places, and in other industries,
      they are following the same inexorable Indian law.”
     

      “Which means?” queried Pagett.
    

      “It means that the rooted habit of the people is to gather in small
      self-contained, self-sufficing family groups with no thought or care for
      any interests but their own—a habit which is scarcely compatible
      with the right acceptation of the elective principle.”
     

      “Yet you must admit, Orde, that though our young friend was not able to
      expound the faith that is in him, your Indian army is too big.”
     

      “Not nearly big enough for its main purpose. And, as a side issue, there
      are certain powerful minorities of fighting folk whose interests an
      Asiatic Government is bound to consider. Arms is as much a means of
      livelihood as civil employ under Government and law. And it would be a
      heavy strain on British bayonets to hold down Sikhs, Jats, Bilochis,
      Rohillas, Rajputs, Bhils, Dogras, Pathans, and Gurkhas to abide by the
      decisions of a numerical majority opposed to their interests. Leave the
      'numerical majority' to itself without the British bayonets—a flock
      of sheep might as reasonably hope to manage a troop of collies.”
     

      “This complaint about excessive growth of the army is akin to another
      contention of the Congress party. They protest against the malversation of
      the whole of the moneys raised by additional taxes as a Famine Insurance
      Fund to other purposes. You must be aware that this special Famine Fund
      has all been spent on frontier roads and defences and strategic railway
      schemes as a protection against Russia.”
     

      “But there was never a special famine fund raised by special taxation and
      put by as in a box. No sane administrator would dream of such a thing. In
      a time of prosperity a finance minister, rejoicing in a margin, proposed
      to annually apply a million and a half to the construction of railways and
      canals for the protection of districts liable to scarcity, and to the
      reduction of the annual loans for public works. But times were not always
      prosperous, and the finance minister had to choose whether he would bang
      up the insurance scheme for a year or impose fresh taxation. When a farmer
      hasn't got the little surplus he hoped to have for buying a new wagon and
      draining a low-lying field corner, you don't accuse him of malversation,
      if he spends what he has on the necessary work of the rest of his farm.”
     

      A clatter of hoofs was heard, and Orde looked up with vexation, but his
      brow cleared as a horseman halted under the porch.
    

      “Hello, Orde! just looked in to ask if you are coming to polo on Tuesday:
      we want you badly to help to crumple up the Krab Bokhar team.”
     

      Orde explained that he had to go out into the District, and while the
      visitor complained that though good men wouldn't play, duffers were always
      keen, and that his side would probably be beaten, Pagett rose to look at
      his mount, a red, lathered Biloch mare, with a curious lyrelike incurving
      of the ears. “Quite a little thoroughbred in all other respects,” said the
      M.P., and Orde presented Mr. Reginald Burke, Manager of the Siad and
      Sialkote Bank to his friend.
    

      “Yes, she's as good as they make 'em, and she's all the female I possess
      and spoiled in consequence, aren't you, old girl?” said Burke, patting the
      mare's glossy neck as she backed and plunged.
    

      “Mr. Pagett,” said Orde, “has been asking me about the Congress. What is
      your opinion?” Burke turned to the M. P. with a frank smile.
    

      “Well, if it's all the same to you, sir, I should say, Damn the Congress,
      but then I'm no politician, but only a business man.”
     

      “You find it a tiresome subject?”
     

      “Yes, it's all that, and worse than that, for this kind of agitation is
      anything but wholesome for the country.”
     

      “How do you mean?”
     

      “It would be a long job to explain, and Sara here won't stand, but you
      know how sensitive capital is, and how timid investors are. All this sort
      of rot is likely to frighten them, and we can't afford to frighten them.
      The passengers aboard an Ocean steamer don't feel reassured when the
      ship's way is stopped, and they hear the workmen's hammers tinkering at
      the engines down below. The old Ark's going on all right as she is, and
      only wants quiet and room to move. Them's my sentiments, and those of some
      other people who have to do with money and business.”
     

      “Then you are a thick-and-thin supporter of the Government as it is.”
     

      “Why, no! The Indian Government is much too timid with its money—like
      an old maiden aunt of mine—always in a funk about her investments.
      They don't spend half enough on railways for instance, and they are slow
      in a general way, and ought to be made to sit up in all that concerns the
      encouragement of private enterprise, and coaxing out into use the millions
      of capital that lie dormant in the country.”
     

      The mare was dancing with impatience, and Burke was evidently anxious to
      be off, so the men wished him goodbye.
    

      “Who is your genial friend who condemns both Congress and Government in a
      breath?” asked Pagett, with an amused smile.
    

      “Just now he is Reggie Burke, keener on polo than on anything else, but if
      you go to the Sind and Sialkote Bank tomorrow you would find Mr. Reginald
      Burke a very capable man of business, known and liked by an immense
      constituency North and South of this.”
     

      “Do you think he is right about the Government's want of enterprise?”
     

      “I should hesitate to say. Better consult the merchants and chambers of
      commerce in Cawnpore, Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta. But though these
      bodies would like, as Reggie puts it, to make Government sit up, it is an
      elementary consideration in governing a country like India, which must be
      administered for the benefit of the people at large, that the counsels of
      those who resort to it for the sake of making money should be judiciously
      weighed and not allowed to overpower the rest. They are welcome guests
      here, as a matter of course, but it has been found best to restrain their
      influence. Thus the rights of plantation laborers, factory operatives, and
      the like, have been protected, and the capitalist, eager to get on, has
      not always regarded Government action with favor. It is quite conceivable
      that under an elective system the commercial communities of the great
      towns might find means to secure majorities on labor questions and on
      financial matters.”
     

      “They would act at least with intelligence and consideration.”
     

      “Intelligence, yes; but as to consideration, who at the present moment
      most bitterly resents the tender solicitude of Lancashire for the welfare
      and protection of the Indian factory operative? English and native
      capitalists running cotton mills and factories.”
     

      “But is the solicitude of Lancashire in this matter entirely
      disinterested?”
     

      “It is no business of mine to say. I merely indicate an example of how a
      powerful commercial interest might hamper a Government intent in the first
      place on the larger interests of humanity.”
     

      Orde broke off to listen a moment. “There's Dr. Lathrop talking to my wife
      in the drawing-room,” said he.
    

      “Surely not; that's a lady's voice, and if my ears don't deceive me, an
      American.”
     

      “Exactly, Dr. Eva McCreery Lathrop, chief of the new Women's Hospital
      here, and a very good fellow forbye. Good morning, Doctor,” he said, as a
      graceful figure came out on the veranda, “you seem to be in trouble. I
      hope Mrs. Orde was able to help you.”
     

      “Your wife is real kind and good, I always come to her when I'm in a fix
      but I fear it's more than comforting I want.”
     

      “You work too hard and wear yourself out,” said Orde, kindly. “Let me
      introduce my friend, Mr. Pagett, just fresh from home, and anxious to
      learn his India. You could tell him something of that more important half
      of which a mere man knows so little.”
     

      “Perhaps I could if I'd any heart to do it, but I'm in trouble, I've lost
      a case, a case that was doing well, through nothing in the world but
      inattention on the part of a nurse I had begun to trust. And when I spoke
      only a small piece of my mind she collapsed in a whining heap on the
      floor. It is hopeless.”
     

      The men were silent, for the blue eyes of the lady doctor were dim.
      Recovering herself she looked up with a smile, half sad, half humorous,
      “And I am in a whining heap, too; but what phase of Indian life are you
      particularly interested in, sir?”
     

      “Mr. Pagett intends to study the political aspect of things and the
      possibility of bestowing electoral institutions on the people.”
     

      “Wouldn't it be as much to the purpose to bestow point-lace collars on
      them? They need many things more urgently than votes. Why it's like giving
      a bread-pill for a broken leg.”
     

      “Er—I don't quite follow,” said Pagett, uneasily.
    

      “Well, what's the matter with this country is not in the least political,
      but an all round entanglement of physical, social, and moral evils and
      corruptions, all more or less due to the unnatural treatment of women. You
      can't gather figs from thistles, and so long as the system of infant
      marriage, the prohibition of the remarriage of widows, the lifelong
      imprisonment of wives and mothers in a worse than penal confinement, and
      the withholding from them of any kind of education or treatment as
      rational beings continues, the country can't advance a step. Half of it is
      morally dead, and worse than dead, and that's just the half from which we
      have a right to look for the best impulses. It's right here where the
      trouble is, and not in any political considerations whatsoever.”
     

      “But do they marry so early?” said Pagett, vaguely.
    

      “The average age is seven, but thousands are married still earlier. One
      result is that girls of twelve and thirteen have to bear the burden of
      wifehood and motherhood, and, as might be expected, the rate of mortality
      both for mothers and children is terrible. Pauperism, domestic
      unhappiness, and a low state of health are only a few of the consequences
      of this. Then, when, as frequently happens, the boy-husband dies
      prematurely, his widow is condemned to worse than death. She may not
      remarry, must live a secluded and despised life, a life so unnatural that
      she sometimes prefers suicide; more often she goes astray. You don't know
      in England what such words as 'infant-marriage,' 'baby-wife,'
      'girl-mother,' and 'virgin-widow' mean; but they mean unspeakable horrors
      here.”
     

      “Well, but the advanced political party here will surely make it their
      business to advocate social reforms as well as political ones,” said
      Pagett.
    

      “Very surely they will do no such thing,” said the lady doctor,
      emphatically. “I wish I could make you understand. Why, even of the funds
      devoted to the Marchioness of Dufferin's organization for medical aid to
      the women of India, it was said in print and in speech, that they would be
      better spent on more college scholarships for men. And in all the advanced
      parties' talk—God forgive them—and in all their programmes,
      they carefully avoid all such subjects. They will talk about the
      protection of the cow, for that's an ancient superstition—they can
      all understand that; but the protection of the women is a new and
      dangerous idea.” She turned to Pagett impulsively:
    

      “You are a member of the English Parliament. Can you do nothing? The
      foundations of their life are rotten—utterly and bestially rotten. I
      could tell your wife things that I couldn't tell you. I know the inner
      life that belongs to the native, and I know nothing else; and believe me
      you might as well try to grow golden-rod in a mushroom-pit as to make
      anything of a people that are born and reared as these—these things
      're. The men talk of their rights and privileges. I have seen the women
      that bear these very men, and again—may God forgive the men!”
     

      Pagett's eyes opened with a large wonder. Dr. Lathrop rose tempestuously.
    

      “I must be off to lecture,” said she, “and I'm sorry that I can't show you
      my hospitals; but you had better believe, sir, that it's more necessary
      for India than all the elections in creation.”
     

      “That's a woman with a mission, and no mistake,” said Pagett, after a
      pause.
    

      “Yes; she believes in her work, and so do I,” said Orde. “I've a notion
      that in the end it will be found that the most helpful work done for India
      in this generation was wrought by Lady Dufferin in drawing attention—what
      work that was, by the way, even with her husband's great name to back it
      to the needs of women here. In effect, native habits and beliefs are an
      organized conspiracy against the laws of health and happy life—but
      there is some dawning of hope now.”
     

      “How d'you account for the general indifference, then?”
     

      “I suppose it's due in part to their fatalism and their utter indifference
      to all human suffering. How much do you imagine the great province of the
      Punjab with over twenty million people and half a score rich towns has
      contributed to the maintenance of civil dispensaries last year? About
      seven thousand rupees.”
     

      “That's seven hundred pounds,” said Pagett, quickly.
    

      “I wish it was,” replied Orde; “but anyway, it's an absurdly inadequate
      sum, and shows one of the blank sides of Oriental character.”
     

      Pagett was silent for a long time. The question of direct and personal
      pain did not lie within his researches. He preferred to discuss the
      weightier matters of the law, and contented himself with murmuring:
      “They'll do better later on.” Then, with a rush, returning to his first
      thought:
    

      “But, my dear Orde, if it's merely a class movement of a local and
      temporary character, how d' you account for Bradlaugh, who is at least a
      man of sense, taking it up?”
     

      “I know nothing of the champion of the New Brahmins but what I see in the
      papers. I suppose there is something tempting in being hailed by a large
      assemblage as the representative of the aspirations of two hundred and
      fifty millions of people. Such a man looks 'through all the roaring and
      the wreaths,' and does not reflect that it is a false perspective, which,
      as a matter of fact, hides the real complex and manifold India from his
      gaze. He can scarcely be expected to distinguish between the ambitions of
      a new oligarchy and the real wants of the people of whom he knows nothing.
      But it's strange that a professed Radical should come to be the chosen
      advocate of a movement which has for its aim the revival of an ancient
      tyranny. Shows how even Radicalism can fall into academic grooves and miss
      the essential truths of its own creed. Believe me, Pagett, to deal with
      India you want first-hand knowledge and experience. I wish he would come
      and live here for a couple of years or so.”
     

      “Is not this rather an ad hominem style of argument?”
     

      “Can't help it in a case like this. Indeed, I am not sure you ought not to
      go further and weigh the whole character and quality and upbringing of the
      man. You must admit that the monumental complacency with which he trotted
      out his ingenious little Constitution for India showed a strange want of
      imagination and the sense of humor.”
     

      “No, I don't quite admit it,” said Pagett.
    

      “Well, you know him and I don't, but that's how it strikes a stranger.” He
      turned on his heel and paced the veranda thoughtfully. “And, after all,
      the burden of the actual, daily unromantic toil falls on the shoulders of
      the men out here, and not on his own. He enjoys all the privileges of
      recommendation without responsibility, and we—well, perhaps, when
      you've seen a little more of India you'll understand. To begin with, our
      death rate's five times higher than yours—I speak now for the brutal
      bureaucrat—and we work on the refuse of worked-out cities and
      exhausted civilizations, among the bones of the dead. In the case of the
      Congress meetings, the only notable fact is that the priests of the altar
      are British, not Buddhist, Jain or Brahminical, and that the whole thing
      is a British contrivance kept alive by the efforts of Messrs. Hume,
      Eardley, Norton, and Digby.”
     

      “You mean to say, then, it's not a spontaneous movement?”
     

      “What movement was ever spontaneous in any true sense of the word? This
      seems to be more factitious than usual. You seem to know a great deal
      about it; try it by the touchstone of subscriptions, a coarse but fairly
      trustworthy criterion, and there is scarcely the color of money in it. The
      delegates write from England that they are out of pocket for working
      expenses, railway fares, and stationery—the mere pasteboard and
      scaffolding of their show. It is, in fact, collapsing from mere financial
      inanition.”
     

      “But you cannot deny that the people of India, who are, perhaps, too poor
      to subscribe, are mentally and morally moved by the agitation,” Pagett
      insisted.
    

      “That is precisely what I do deny. The native side of the movement is the
      work of a limited class, a microscopic minority, as Lord Dufferin
      described it, when compared with the people proper, but still a very
      interesting class, seeing that it is of our own creation. It is composed
      almost entirely of those of the literary or clerkly castes who have
      received an English education.”
     

      “Surely that's a very important class. Its members must be the ordained
      leaders of popular thought.”
     

      “Anywhere else they might be leaders, but they have no social weight
      here.”
     

      Pagett laughed. “That's an epigrammatic way of putting it, Orde.”
     

      “Is it? Let's see,” said the Deputy Commissioner of Amara, striding into
      the sunshine toward a half-naked gardener potting roses. He took the man's
      hoe, and went to a rain-scarped bank at the bottom of the garden.
    

      “Come here, Pagett,” he said, and cut at the sun-baked soil. After three
      strokes there rolled from under the blade of the hoe the half of a
      clanking skeleton that settled at Pagett's feet in an unseemly jumble of
      bones. The M.P. drew back.
    

      “Our houses are built on cemeteries,” said Orde. “There are scores of
      thousands of graves within ten miles.”
     

      Pagett was contemplating the skull with the awed fascination of a man who
      has but little to do with the dead. “India's a very curious place,” said
      he, after a pause.
    

      “Ah? You'll know all about it in three months. Come in to lunch,” said
      Orde.
    







      VOLUME V PLAIN TALES FROM THE HILLS
    







      LISPETH
    

   Look, you have cast out Love! What Gods are these
     You bid me please?
   The Three in One, the One in Three? Not so!
     To my own Gods I go.
   It may be they shall give me greater ease
   Than your cold Christ and tangled Trinities.
            —The Convert.


      She was the daughter of Sonoo, a Hill-man, and Jadeh his wife. One year
      their maize failed, and two bears spent the night in their only
      poppy-field just above the Sutlej Valley on the Kotgarh side; so, next
      season, they turned Christian, and brought their baby to the Mission to be
      baptized. The Kotgarh Chaplain christened her Elizabeth, and “Lispeth” is
      the Hill or pahari pronunciation.
    

      Later, cholera came into the Kotgarh Valley and carried off Sonoo and
      Jadeh, and Lispeth became half-servant, half-companion to the wife of the
      then Chaplain of Kotgarh. This was after the reign of the Moravian
      missionaries, but before Kotgarh had quite forgotten her title of
      “Mistress of the Northern Hills.”
     

      Whether Christianity improved Lispeth, or whether the gods of her own
      people would have done as much for her under any circumstances, I do not
      know; but she grew very lovely. When a Hill girl grows lovely, she is
      worth traveling fifty miles over bad ground to look upon. Lispeth had a
      Greek face—one of those faces people paint so often, and see so
      seldom. She was of a pale, ivory color and, for her race, extremely tall.
      Also, she possessed eyes that were wonderful; and, had she not been
      dressed in the abominable print-cloths affected by Missions, you would,
      meeting her on the hill-side unexpectedly, have thought her the original
      Diana of the Romans going out to slay.
    

      Lispeth took to Christianity readily, and did not abandon it when she
      reached womanhood, as do some Hill girls. Her own people hated her because
      she had, they said, become a memsahib and washed herself daily; and the
      Chaplain's wife did not know what to do with her. Somehow, one cannot ask
      a stately goddess, five foot ten in her shoes, to clean plates and dishes.
      So she played with the Chaplain's children and took classes in the Sunday
      School, and read all the books in the house, and grew more and more
      beautiful, like the Princesses in fairy tales. The Chaplain's wife said
      that the girl ought to take service in Simla as a nurse or something
      “genteel.” But Lispeth did not want to take service. She was very happy
      where she was.
    

      When travellers—there were not many in those years—came to
      Kotgarh, Lispeth used to lock herself into her own room for fear they
      might take her away to Simla, or somewhere out into the unknown world.
    

      One day, a few months after she was seventeen years old, Lispeth went out
      for a walk. She did not walk in the manner of English ladies—a mile
      and a half out, and a ride back again. She covered between twenty and
      thirty miles in her little constitutionals, all about and about, between
      Kotgarh and Narkunda. This time she came back at full dusk, stepping down
      the breakneck descent into Kotgarh with something heavy in her arms. The
      Chaplain's wife was dozing in the drawing-room when Lispeth came in
      breathing hard and very exhausted with her burden. Lispeth put it down on
      the sofa, and said simply:
    

      “This is my husband. I found him on the Bagi Road. He has hurt himself. We
      will nurse him, and when he is well, your husband shall marry him to me.”
     

      This was the first mention Lispeth had ever made of her matrimonial views,
      and the Chaplain's wife shrieked with horror. However, the man on the sofa
      needed attention first. He was a young Englishman, and his head had been
      cut to the bone by something jagged. Lispeth said she had found him down
      the khud, so she had brought him in.
    

      He was breathing queerly and was unconscious.
    

      He was put to bed and tended by the Chaplain, who knew something of
      medicine; and Lispeth waited outside the door in case she could be useful.
      She explained to the Chaplain that this was the man she meant to marry;
      and the Chaplain and his wife lectured her severely on the impropriety of
      her conduct. Lispeth listened quietly, and repeated her first proposition.
      It takes a great deal of Christianity to wipe out uncivilized Eastern
      instincts, such as falling in love at first sight. Lispeth, having found
      the man she worshipped, did not see why she should keep silent as to her
      choice. She had no intention of being sent away, either. She was going to
      nurse that Englishman until he was well enough to marry her. This was her
      little programme.
    

      After a fortnight of slight fever and inflammation, the Englishman
      recovered coherence and thanked the Chaplain and his wife, and Lispeth—especially
      Lispeth—for their kindness. He was a traveller in the East, he said—they
      never talked about “globe-trotters” in those days, when the P. & O.
      fleet was young and small—and had come from Dehra Dun to hunt for
      plants and butterflies among the Simla hills. No one at Simla, therefore,
      knew anything about him. He fancied he must have fallen over the cliff
      while stalking a fern on a rotten tree-trunk, and that his coolies must
      have stolen his baggage and fled. He thought he would go back to Simla
      when he was a little stronger. He desired no more mountaineering.
    

      He made small haste to go away, and recovered his strength slowly.
    

      Lispeth objected to being advised either by the Chaplain or his wife; so
      the latter spoke to the Englishman, and told him how matters stood in
      Lispeth's heart. He laughed a good deal, and said it was very pretty and
      romantic, a perfect idyl of the Himalayas; but, as he was engaged to a
      girl at Home, he fancied that nothing would happen. Certainly he would
      behave with discretion. He did that. Still he found it very pleasant to
      talk to Lispeth, and walk with Lispeth, and say nice things to her, and
      call her pet names while he was getting strong enough to go away. It meant
      nothing at all to him, and everything in the world to Lispeth. She was
      very happy while the fortnight lasted, because she had found a man to
      love.
    

      Being a savage by birth, she took no trouble to hide her feelings, and the
      Englishman was amused. When he went away, Lispeth walked with him, up the
      Hill as far as Narkunda, very troubled and very miserable. The Chaplain's
      wife, being a good Christian and disliking anything in the shape of fuss
      or scandal—Lispeth was beyond her management entirely—had told
      the Englishman to tell Lispeth that he was coming back to marry her. “She
      is but a child, you know, and, I fear, at heart a heathen,” said the
      Chaplain's wife. So all the twelve miles up the hill the Englishman, with
      his arm around Lispeth's waist, was assuring the girl that he would come
      back and marry her; and Lispeth made him promise over and over again. She
      wept on the Narkunda Ridge till he had passed out of sight along the
      Muttiani path.
    

      Then she dried her tears and went in to Kotgarh again, and said to the
      Chaplain's wife: “He will come back and marry me. He has gone to his own
      people to tell them so.” And the Chaplain's wife soothed Lispeth and said:
      “He will come back.” At the end of two months, Lispeth grew impatient, and
      was told that the Englishman had gone over the seas to England. She knew
      where England was, because she had read little geography primers; but, of
      course, she had no conception of the nature of the sea, being a Hill girl.
    

      There was an old puzzle-map of the World in the House. Lispeth had played
      with it when she was a child. She unearthed it again, and put it together
      of evenings, and cried to herself, and tried to imagine where her
      Englishman was. As she had no ideas of distance or steamboats, her notions
      were somewhat erroneous. It would not have made the least difference had
      she been perfectly correct; for the Englishman had no intention of coming
      back to marry a Hill girl. He forgot all about her by the time he was
      butterfly-hunting in Assam. He wrote a book on the East afterwards.
      Lispeth's name did not appear.
    

      At the end of three months, Lispeth made daily pilgrimage to Narkunda to
      see if her Englishman was coming along the road. It gave her comfort, and
      the Chaplain's wife, finding her happier, thought that she was getting
      over her “barbarous and most indelicate folly.” A little later the walks
      ceased to help Lispeth and her temper grew very bad. The Chaplain's wife
      thought this a profitable time to let her know the real state of affairs—that
      the Englishman had only promised his love to keep her quiet—that he
      had never meant anything, and that it was “wrong and improper” of Lispeth
      to think of marriage with an Englishman, who was of a superior clay,
      besides being promised in marriage to a girl of his own people. Lispeth
      said that all this was clearly impossible, because he had said he loved
      her, and the Chaplain's wife had, with her own lips, asserted that the
      Englishman was coming back.
    

      “How can what he and you said be untrue?” asked Lispeth.
    

      “We said it as an excuse to keep you quiet, child,” said the Chaplain's
      wife.
    

      “Then you have lied to me,” said Lispeth, “you and he?”
     

      The Chaplain's wife bowed her head, and said nothing. Lispeth was silent,
      too for a little time; then she went out down the valley, and returned in
      the dress of a Hill girl—infamously dirty, but without the nose and
      ear rings. She had her hair braided into the long pig-tail, helped out
      with black thread, that Hill women wear.
    

      “I am going back to my own people,” said she. “You have killed Lispeth.
      There is only left old Jadeh's daughter—the daughter of a pahari and
      the servant of Tarka Devi. You are all liars, you English.”
     

      By the time that the Chaplain's wife had recovered from the shock of the
      announcement that Lispeth had 'verted to her mother's gods, the girl had
      gone; and she never came back.
    

      She took to her own unclean people savagely, as if to make up the arrears
      of the life she had stepped out of; and, in a little time, she married a
      wood-cutter who beat her, after the manner of paharis, and her beauty
      faded soon.
    

      “There is no law whereby you can account for the vagaries of the heathen,”
       said the Chaplain's wife, “and I believe that Lispeth was always at heart
      an infidel.” Seeing she had been taken into the Church of England at the
      mature age of five weeks, this statement does not do credit to the
      Chaplain's wife.
    

      Lispeth was a very old woman when she died. She always had a perfect
      command of English, and when she was sufficiently drunk, could sometimes
      be induced to tell the story of her first love-affair.
    

      It was hard then to realize that the bleared, wrinkled creature, so like a
      wisp of charred rag, could ever have been “Lispeth of the Kotgarh
      Mission.”