THE MAID OF THE MILL

 I

 "The only objection I have to ghost stories,"
said young Sanford, "is from a literary point of
view. They're so badly done, you know."

 "In what way?" said the clerk of the hotel, settling
back in his office chair, and smiling at young
Sanford and the circle of men who had come down
for their keys from the billiard-room.

 "Well, in this way. I'm not considering the little
harmless stories where the heroes are only
frightened, or even those where their heads are
grey in the morning. I'm thinking of those where
they never live to tell the awful tale, you know;
the ones in which they tell their friends to come
if they call, and then they never call; the ones in
which, although they scream and scream, nobody
hears them.

 "And yet the old trembling man who points them
to the haunted room knows perfectly well that five
men have entered that room on five nineteenths of October, and never come out alive. Yet he
only warns them, or at most only beseeches
them not to go in. He has no police force—not
that police could seriously harm the ghosts, but
somehow they never appear to the police; he does
not arrange with the victim's friend to burst in
the door at twelve-thirty, anyhow, whether they
are summoned or not; he doesn't—but then, what
do any of them do that they might be expected to?
And all this forced condition of things so that the
ghost may have all the evening to work quietly in.
Do you mean to tell me that if I were frightened to
the extent of grey hair in the morning, I couldn't
scream loud enough to be heard any distance?"

 This speech drew nods of approval from several
of the men. "I've thought of that, too," said the
clerk. In a dark corner behind the stove sat a man,
hunched over his knees, silent, and apparently unknown
to any of the others. At this point he looked
up, cleared his throat, and said in a strange, husky
voice:

 "Do you really suppose that that is anything
else than nonsense?" Young Sanford flushed. "Sir"—he began. The other continued in his
rough, thick voice:

 "Do you suppose they don't try to scream? Do
you suppose they don't think they're screaming?"

 A little silence of discomfort fell on the circle.
There was something disagreeably suggestive in
the question. Suddenly the man spoke again.

 "I had a friend," he said, "in fact, I had two
friends. One was young—about your age," nodding
to Sanford. "The other was older. He was not
so clever nor so attractive nor so brilliant nor so
jolly as the younger, but he had a characteristic—perhaps
his only one—for he was a very ordinary
man. He had an iron will. His determination was
as unbreakable as anything human could be. And
he was devoted to his friend, who, somehow, loved
him. I don't know why, because he had so many
other admirers—but he stuck to his friend—Joan.
They called the two Darby and Joan. Their real
names were not unlike those, and it was rather
funny. Darby used to talk as you were talking,
sir," he nodded again to Sanford, "and he was
sure, cock sure, that what he said was right. He would tell what things were possible and what
were not, and prove what he said very nicely. Joan
wasn't clever, but he knew that it does no good
to call a thing impossible. He knew, in fact, that
nothing is more possible than the most impossible
things."

 The man coughed and cleared his throat and
waited a moment as if to see whether he were intruding.
No one spoke, so he went on.

 "One day Darby rushed into Joan's study and
told him of a haunted mill he'd discovered. It was
one of the old mills where the farmers used to
bring their sacks before the big concerns in the
West swallowed all the little trades. It was dusty
and cobwebbed and broken down and unused and
haunted. And there was a farmhouse directly
across the road and a house on either side of it
not a hundred feet away.

 "'Was it always haunted?' asked Joan. 'No,'
said Darby, 'only once a year.' On Christmas eve
every year for nineteen years there had appeared,
late at night, a little light in one of the windows;
and that side of the house had an odd look, some how
it seemed to look fresher and newer, and at
one o'clock or so a horrible piercing shriek would
ring out from the mill, and then a kind of crashing
fall, and then all was still, and the light would
disappear.

 "'Had nobody investigated?' Oh, yes. The
first year it was noticed was when houses were
built up around it. It used to stand away from
everything else, and the miller and his family lived
there. Then, long after they were dead, people
moved out there and heard the noises and saw the
light. They thought of tramps and escaped criminals
and everything one suggests till it had occurred
too repeatedly for that, and then a young
farmer went over one Christmas eve, not telling
any one, and they found him roaming about the
mill, a hopeless wreck the next day; he had gone
quite mad.

 "And the next year a man came up from
the city, and his friends were in the next room to
help him if he called, and he didn't call, and they
were afraid to startle him by knocking, so they
got a ladder and peeped into the window at ten minutes to one, and he lay peacefully on the bed
with his eyes closed and his hands stretched loosely
out, and they thought it was a great joke that he
should sleep through it, so they went home, and
in the morning they found him in horrible convulsions,
and he never recovered.

 "And there were two young divinity students
that went once together, and they had a crowd
along with instructions to break in the door at one
exactly. And at the stroke of one the crowd beat in
the great door and burst into an empty room!
They had gone up a flight too far, somehow, and
as they stood staring at each other, from the room
beneath them came a dreadful shriek and a crash,
and when they rushed down they found the boys
in a dead faint. They brought them to and got
them home, and they muttered nonsense about a
dog and a sash and would say no more. And they
escaped with severe nervous prostration. But later
they lost what little nerve they had and couldn't
sleep at night, and joined the Catholic Church, because
they said that there were things they found
it difficult to reconcile....

  "'And what was the story of it all?' asked Joan.
Oh, the story was disagreeable enough. The miller's
daughter wanted to marry a poor young man,
but her father would not let her. And she refused
to accept his rich nephew. So he locked her in her
room till she should consent. And she stayed there a
week. And one night the nephew came home late
and saw a tiny light in her window, and presently
he saw some one place a ladder and go softly up,
and the miller's daughter leaned out and helped
him in. So he told her father, who came into her
room the next night with a bloodhound, and bound
her to the bed and hushed her cries with her sash,
and lit the little light. And when her lover had
climbed the ladder—the dog was there. And that
was Christmas eve.

 "'Do the people suffer this without complaint—these
deaths and convulsions and apostasies?'
asked Joan. Well, no. But if they destroyed the
mill a liquor saloon would go up immediately. The
proprietor was simply waiting. And they didn't
want that. So they kept it quiet. And nobody need
go there. Nobody had been alarmed or hurt except the meddlers. And in villages the people have less
scientific curiosity. But Darby was going immediately.
It was December twenty-third now. Joan
must come, too; it would be most exciting. Joan
argued against it, but he too was curious, so they
agreed to go. And the next day they went."

 II

 By this time the circle was absolutely silent,
concentrated to ears and eyes. They stared and
leaned towards the shadowy corner behind the stove
where the dimly defined figure crouched. The clerk
got up and turned down the gas, which flared in
his face, and the room was almost wholly dark.
The man spoke in a dull, mechanical way, as one
speaks who clears his mind, once for all. At intervals
he waited fully ten seconds to rest his voice,
strangely impressive, with its strained, choked
tones.

 "The next day they went," he repeated. "Darby
was not only clever—he was extremely sensitive.
Ridicule was unbearable to him. And though he
was a literary fellow, and artistic and all that, he was practical, too, for all he was so brilliant and
winning. It actually troubled him that people
should believe anything but what he called 'the
strictly logical,' and he thought Joan's ideas far
too flexible and credulous. It was really for Joan's
sake, he said in joke, whom he rather suspected of
spiritualistic leanings, that he intended to make the
excursion into the country. And he would tell nobody.
He would make no inquiries. He would conduct
the search along somewhat unusual lines, he
declared. One of them should sleep in the room.
At one o'clock precisely the other should quietly
mount a ladder fixed just where the mythical
ladder had been and enter the room in that way,
thus preventing any mischievous practical jokes
from without, and insuring help to the man within,
should he need it.

 "And Joan agreed to this. He was interested
himself, and he'd have been as eager and scornful
as Darby if it hadn't occurred to him—for he was
a terribly literal fellow—that four tragedies, sad
as these had been, and all unexplained, couldn't
be accounted for by chance nor made less sad even by a good logician like Darby. So he suggested
one or two friends to fall back upon in case of
foul play of any kind. And Darby looked at him
and laughed a little sneering laugh and called
him——" The man choked and bent lower. He
seemed to be unable to speak for some seconds.
Then he hurried on, speaking from this point very
rapidly and using a kind of clumsy gesture that
brought the scenes he spoke of strangely clear to
the men around him.

 "He called him a coward. So Joan agreed to
go. And on the afternoon of the day before Christmas
they took a long ladder and a lantern and
some sandwiches and two revolvers and drove in
a butcher's cart to the little village. And Joan was
as eager as Darby that no one should know. You
see, Darby called him a coward.

 "They slipped into the old, dingy mill at dusk,
and went over it with the greatest thoroughness.
Everything was open and empty. Only the corner
bedroom and one of the living rooms were furnished
at all. The dust lay thick in the mill
proper, but the living rooms were singularly free from it. Darby noticed this and remarked it to
Joan. 'It doesn't smell half so musty, either,'
he said. 'I'm glad of that. I hate old, musty
smells.'

 "Then a queer, crawly feeling came over Joan,
and he said: 'Darby, let's go home. Life's short
enough, heaven knows. If anything——' And
then Darby told him once for all that if he wanted
to go home he might, and otherwise he might
shut up.

 "'Do you want it dusty and smelly?' said he.

 "'Yes,' said Joan, 'I do. I don't see why it isn't,
either. It's just as old and just as deserted as the
other part.'

 "'You might get a little dust from the other
side and scatter it about,' said Darby, and
before Joan could reply he had scooped a handful
of dry, brown dust from the bagroom of the mill
and laid it about on the bureau and chairs of the
bedroom. 'Now come out for our last patrol,' he
said. They went out and studied the mill carefully.
As they came around to the house side, keeping
carefully in the shadow, Joan looked surprised and pointed to the door by which they had entered.

 "'That door's shut,' he said.

 "'Well?' asked Darby.

 "'We left it ajar.'

 "'Oh, the wind!' said Darby, and went up to
the door softly, listening for any escaping joker.
He rattled the knob and pushed it inward, but the
door did not yield. 'Why, you couldn't have left it
ajar,' he said, 'it's locked!'

 "Joan stared at the house, wondering if it was
possible that the window-panes really shone so
brightly. And the cobwebs about the blinds, where
were they? He could have sworn that the porch
was full of dead leaves and sticks when they went
in—it was as clean as his hand now.

 "'We'll go in by the window, the broken one, at
the back,' he said quietly. They went around the
house and hunted for the broken window, but did
not find it. The window was not only whole but
locked. Then Joan set his teeth.

 "'The broken window must have been at the mill
side,' he said, 'we'll go there.' So they went around and clambered in by a paneless window and went to
the bedroom. The room was dim, but they could
distinguish objects fairly well. Darby looked
queerly at Joan.

 "'So you cleared away the dust,' he asked.

 "'What dust?' asked Joan. Then he followed
Darby's eyes, and where the little piles of brown
dust had lain were only clean, bare boards.

 "Outside, the teams of the home-coming farmers
rolled by. A dog barked, and now a child called.
But they seemed far away—in another country.
Where the two young fellows stood, there was a
strange lonely belt of silence.

 "'Perhaps I brushed the chair as we went out,'
said Darby slowly. But he looked at Joan queerly.

 "They took their supper, and then Joan announced
his intention of staying in the room while
Darby patrolled the house, and climbed the ladder
at one. At first Darby demurred. He had planned
to stay. But Joan was inflexible. It was utterly
useless to argue with him, so Darby agreed. If
Joan wanted help he was to call. At eleven and
twelve Darby was to climb the ladder and look in, and at one he was to come in, whatever the situation.
At the slightest intimation of danger of any
kind Joan was to fire his revolver and Darby was
to call for help and rush up the ladder. For all
that the people were so quiet round about, they
were probably uneasy—they knew that things
might happen on the night before Christmas.

 "Joan sat for some time after Darby had left
him, staring about the room. It was simply furnished
with a large bed, a table, and two deal
chairs. Thrown over the bed was a moth-eaten
blanket, checked white and red. Joan swept it off
from the bed and shook it, closing his eyes instinctively
to avoid the dust. But no dust came.
He shook it again. It was as fresh and clean as
his handkerchief. He threw it back on the bed and
looked out at Darby walking quietly around in the
shadow.

 "He was glad Darby was out there. He got to
thinking of ghosts and strange preparations for
their coming. The boards of the window creaked,
and he gasped and stared, only to see Darby's
face at the window. 'Anything happened?' he signalled. Joan shook his head. It must be
eleven o'clock. How was it possible? The time
had seemed so short. He stared at a big star till
his eyes swam. He felt dull and drowsy. He had
sat up late the night before, and he needed sleep.

 "A thought came to him, and it seemed somehow
very original and striking. He tapped on the
pane to Darby.

 "'I'll lie down and take a little nap,' he whispered,
opening the window softly. 'You can call
me at twelve.' Darby nodded.

 "'How do you feel, old fellow? All right?' he
asked."

 The man choked again and was silent for a time.
The strain was growing. The men waited for something
to happen as one awaits the falling of the
red, snapping embers.

 "Joan lay down in that bed," said the stranger
hoarsely, and from this point he hurried on almost
too quickly for clearness, "on that hideous checked
blanket, and fell asleep. He fell asleep thinking
of Darby's words and how thoughtful they were:
'How do you feel, old fellow? All right?'

  "He had bad dreams. He dreamed a woman
stood at the foot of the bed and stared at him
and motioned him to go. And she was an unnatural
woman. She kept changing colour, from red to yellow,
from yellow to cream colour, from cream
colour to white, from white to—ah! she was a dead
woman!

 "She motioned him to go, but he refused. She
came to the side of the bed and took off her long
red sash and bound him down. Then he was willing
to go indeed, and strained his muscles in useless
efforts to break away, but she laughed at him
and then breathed in his face till her damp, icy
breath chilled his very soul—and he woke, covered
with the sweat of terror—to see her standing at the
foot of the bed, looking, looking into his staring
eyes!

 III

 "So it was true. There were such things. But
at least his limbs were free, and to his joy he discovered
that he was not afraid. No; he had a dull
feeling of coming disaster, but no fear. She was a young woman, with big shadowy eyes and a
strange mouth. She had on a long, loose white
nightgown, open at the throat, and she carried
a little lamp. 'Go!' he saw in her eyes as plainly
as if she said it. He looked about the room—he
could have sworn it was changed. It had the air
of a woman's room, that she is living in and keeps
her things in. He had no right there—none. He
should have gone. But he was proud because he
wasn't afraid, and he answered her with his eyes
that he would not go. A tired, puzzled look came
into her face, a kind of frown, and she leaned
over the footboard and begged him with those big
dark eyes, begged him hard to go. He had his
chance—oh, yes, the fool had his chance!

 "But he was so proud that he could master her,
master a returned soul—for lovely as she was, he
knew she wasn't human—that he only set his teeth
and started up to come nearer her. But she raised
her hand and he fell back, feeling queer and
drowsy. Then she came to the edge of the bed and
sat down and took from behind her a soft red silk
sash and drew it across his face. A sweet, languid feeling stole over him; the bed seemed like a cloud
of down, her sash smelled like spice and sandalwood
in a warm wind. He felt he was being drugged and
weakened, and he tried to stumble up, but the soft
silk smothered him, and he became almost unconscious.

 "He only wanted one thing—to feel her fingers
touch his face and to hold her long brown hair. And
while she drew the sash across his mouth he
stretched out his hands on either side to catch it and
reach her fingers. There was nothing ghostly about
her—she was only a lovely dream-woman. Maybe
he was asleep....

 "And then she pulled the sash away, and he
caught her eye and awoke with a start—her look
was full of triumph. She didn't beg him any longer.
This was no helpless, gentle spirit of a woman;
this was a weird elemental creature; she hadn't any
soul or any pity; something made her act out all
this dreadful tragedy, without any regard for human
life or reason. He knew somehow that she
couldn't help his weakness; that though in some
fiendish way she had bound him hand and foot, she did it not of herself, but in obedience to some
awful law that she couldn't help any more than
he. And then he began to be afraid. Slowly great
waves of horror rose and grew and broke over him.
He tried to move his feet and hands, but he could
not so much as will the muscles to contract. He
strained till the drops stood on his forehead, but
still his arms lay stretched motionless across the
bed.

 "Just then he met her eyes again, and his heart
sank, they were so mocking and bitter. 'Fool!
fool!' they said. They were so malignant, and yet
so impersonal—he could have sworn that she was
afraid too. What was to happen? Would she kill
him? His tongue was helpless. He worked his lips
weakly, but they made no words. And she turned
down her mouth scornfully and played with the
sash. Why did she wait? For she was waiting for
a time to come—her eyes told that. What was that
time? A great joy that Darby was safe outdoors
came to him, and he remembered that Darby would
come at twelve! He would break the spell. And just
then she left the bed and bent down over the little lamp, and when she took it up it was lighted. She
moved across to the window and set it in the sill.
Then she glided to the door and locked it. Joan
heard the bolt slip.

 "Steps sounded on the ladder outside. Into
Joan's half-dulled thought came a kind of comfort.
Darby was coming. Some one knocked on the
pane and the window was raised from the outside.

 "'Joan! Joan!' whispered Darby, 'are you all
right? Why did you light the lamp? Where are
you?' And then Joan, the fool, forgot that if he
had not answered, Darby would surely have come
in. It seemed to him that if he did not speak now,
he was lost. He strained his throat to say four
words—only four: 'All right. Come in.' Just that.
The first two to reassure Darby, the second to bring
him. He made a mighty effort. 'All—all right!'
he shouted, 'c—c—,' and then her eyes were on
him and he faded into unconsciousness. He saw in
them a terror and surprise. He understood that
she wondered at his speaking. There was a stinging
pain in his throat, and he heard Darby whisper
angrily,

  "'Keep still, can't you? Don't howl so! It's
quarter to one. I looked in at twelve, and didn't
want to wake you. You'd better get up now—who's
that down there?' and with a sickening despair
he heard Darby hurry down the ladder.

 "The leaves rustled a little and then all was
still. He didn't struggle any longer. It was clear to
him now. He was to play the lover in this ill-fated
tragedy, whose actors offered themselves, fools that
they were, unasked, each time. And what happened
to the lover? Why, he was killed. Well, rather that
he should die than Darby. It seemed to him so
reasonable, now. No one had asked him to suffer.
He had had his chance to go and refused it. No
one could help him now. Not even she. They must
play it out, puppets of an inexorable drama.

 "And then the girl dashed to the bed, and sank
beside it as if to pray. And he felt her hair on his
face, as he had hoped, but it brought no joy to
him. For something was coming up from the floor
below. Something that sent a thrill before it, that
advanced, slowly, slowly, surely. The girl shuddered
and grasped the bed and tried to pull her self
up, but she sank helplessly back. And slowly
the bolt of the door pushed back. No one pushed it,
but it slipped back. Then slowly, inch by inch,
the door opened. Joan grew stiff and cold, and
would not have looked but that his eyes were
fixed. Wider, wider, till it stood flat against the
wall.

 "Then up the stairs came steps. And with them
others, quick and pattering. What was that? Who
walked so quickly, with padding, thudding feet?
He longed for them to come in—he dreaded their
coming. The door was ready for them. The room
was swept and clean.

 "Up, up, they came, the heavy steps and the
scratching, pattering feet. Nearer, nearer—they
came in. The man, large, dark, heavy-jawed; the
stone-grey, snarling hound, licking its frothing
jaws, straining at its chain. The girl writhed
against the bed in terror—she opened her lips,
but with a stride the man was upon her,
his heavy hand was over her mouth. He dragged
her up, shaking and sinking, he snatched the sash
and bound her mouth, he held her at arm's length and stared once in her eyes. Scorn and rage and
murder were in his.

 "Joan forgot his own danger in terrified pity.
He struggled a moment, but it was useless. His
dreadful bonds still held. The man came to the bed,
dragging the hound, and Joan shut his eyes, not
to see the dark evil face. He would die in the dark,
alone, unaided. Oh! to call once! To hear a human
voice! But there was no sound but the panting
of the great, eager dog.

 "The man seemed not to see him. He seized the
girl, and turning her toward the light that burned
at the pane, he bound her to the bed-post with the
silken sash. She writhed and bent and tried to
grasp his feet; she pleaded with her eyes till their
agony cut Joan like a knife, but the man tied her
straight and fast. Then he walked to the pane
and crouched down by it and held the dog's muzzle,
and became like a stone image.

 "And suddenly it flashed across Joan's mind,
with a passion of fear to which all that had gone
before was as nothing, that Darby was coming up
that ladder to that light! Darby, whom he had thought so safe, was to come unknowing, unwarned,
to that straining, panting beast. He
turned faint for a moment. And then with all the
power of his soul he tried to scream. He felt his
throat strain and bend and all but burst with the
tremendous effort. He tried again, and the pain
blinded him. At his feet there the girl strained and
twisted, great tears rolling down her cheeks. And
yet there was a ghastly silence. The stifled panting
of that hound echoed in a deadly quiet. It
was horrible, pitiful! The girl's white gown was
torn and mussed; her soft naked shoulder quivered
when she strained against the cruel sash.
He could see that her arm was red where it was
tied.

 "She trembled and bent and bit her lip till the
blood stained her chin. He cursed and prayed and
shrieked till the sound, had it come, would have
deafened him—but it was all a ghastly mockery!
It was as still as a quiet summer afternoon—and
the dog and the man waited at the window.

 "There was a sound of scraping. Someone was
coming up the ladder—someone who whistled softly under his breath, and came nearer every
moment. Up, up—the ladder rattled against the
window-frame. The man at the window slipped his
hand slowly, slowly from the dog's muzzle. The
dog stiffened and drew back his black, dripping
jaws from his yellow teeth. The man's fingers sunk
in the beast's wrinkled neck and he held him back,
while he threw one look of hate and triumph at
the tortured woman behind him.

 "The man bound to the bed couldn't bear it any
longer. As a hand grasped the window-sill from
outside, he summoned all his iron will, and with a
rasping, rending effort that brought a sickly,
warm taste to his mouth, he gave a hoarse cry.

 "Then the woman leaned over till the sash sunk
into her soft flesh, and shrieked with a high, shrill
note that cut the air like a knife. But even as she
shrieked, a form rose over the sill, there was a
rush from inside, and their voices were drowned
in a cry of terror, a scream so broken and despairing
that Joan could not recognise the voice. And
then there was a horrid crashing fall, and the light
went out, and something snapped in the brain of the man chained to the bed, and he dropped for
miles into a deep, black gulf."

  There was a dead silence in the room. No one
dared to speak. The stranger's voice had quavered
and broken, and in a hoarse whisper he said, rising
and stumbling to the door while they made
way for him silently:

 "And when he knew his friends again, Darby
had been buried a long time. Joan did not know
whether a broken neck is so much worse than anything
else in the world. He hadn't any curiosity
about the mill—he didn't care to hear the details
of how they burned it to the ground. Perhaps
after a while he will be too tired to contradict ignorant
people. But he thinks—he has said, that
when a man has not slept five hours in a week, nor
spoken for days together without agony, much
may be forgiven him in the line of intolerance
of other people's ignorance—a blessed ignorance
gentlemen, a blessed ignorance."

 The door closed behind him and the men drew
a long breath. No one turned out the gas and it burned till morning, for they took their keys in
silence and went upstairs, for the most part arm
in arm, haunted by the hoarse, rough voice of the
stranger, whom they never saw again.

 And indeed they did not care to see him. "For
what could one say?" as young Sanford demanded,
the next day. "It either happened, or it didn't. If
it didn't, he can say no more; if it did, then he
is right, and we are in blessed ignorance." And
no one of the circle but nodded and looked for a
moment at the chair behind the stove.