THE PRINCESS
    

A CARRIAGE with
      four fine sleek horses drove in at the big so-called Red Gate of the N—-
      Monastery. While it was still at a distance, the priests and monks who
      were standing in a group round the part of the hostel allotted to the
      gentry, recognised by the coachman and horses that the lady in the
      carriage was Princess Vera Gavrilovna, whom they knew very well.
    

      An old man in livery jumped off the box and helped the princess to get out
      of the carriage. She raised her dark veil and moved in a leisurely way up
      to the priests to receive their blessing; then she nodded pleasantly to
      the rest of the monks and went into the hostel.
    

      “Well, have you missed your princess?” she said to the monk
      who brought in her things. “It’s a whole month since I’ve
      been to see you. But here I am; behold your princess. And where is the
      Father Superior? My goodness, I am burning with impatience! Wonderful,
      wonderful old man! You must be proud of having such a Superior.”
    

      When the Father Superior came in, the princess uttered a shriek of
      delight, crossed her arms over her bosom, and went up to receive his
      blessing.
    

      “No, no, let me kiss your hand,” she said, snatching it and
      eagerly kissing it three times. “How glad I am to see you at last,
      holy Father! I’m sure you’ve forgotten your princess, but my
      thoughts have been in your dear monastery every moment. How delightful it
      is here! This living for God far from the busy, giddy world has a special
      charm of its own, holy Father, which I feel with my whole soul although I
      cannot express it!”
    

      The princess’s cheeks glowed and tears came into her eyes. She
      talked incessantly, fervently, while the Father Superior, a grave, plain,
      shy old man of seventy, remained mute or uttered abruptly, like a soldier
      on duty, phrases such as:
    

      “Certainly, Your Excellency. . . . Quite so. I understand.”
    

      “Has Your Excellency come for a long stay?” he inquired.
    

      “I shall stay the night here, and to-morrow I’m going on to
      Klavdia Nikolaevna’s—it’s a long time since I’ve
      seen her—and the day after to-morrow I’ll come back to you and
      stay three or four days. I want to rest my soul here among you, holy
      Father. . . .”
    

      The princess liked being at the monastery at N—-. For the last two
      years it had been a favourite resort of hers; she used to go there almost
      every month in the summer and stay two or three days, even sometimes a
      week. The shy novices, the stillness, the low ceilings, the smell of
      cypress, the modest fare, the cheap curtains on the windows—all this
      touched her, softened her, and disposed her to contemplation and good
      thoughts. It was enough for her to be half an hour in the hostel for her
      to feel that she, too, was timid and modest, and that she, too, smelt of
      cypress-wood. The past retreated into the background, lost its
      significance, and the princess began to imagine that in spite of her
      twenty-nine years she was very much like the old Father Superior, and
      that, like him, she was created not for wealth, not for earthly grandeur
      and love, but for a peaceful life secluded from the world, a life in
      twilight like the hostel.
    

      It happens that a ray of light gleams in the dark cell of the anchorite
      absorbed in prayer, or a bird alights on the window and sings its song;
      the stern anchorite will smile in spite of himself, and a gentle, sinless
      joy will pierce through the load of grief over his sins, like water
      flowing from under a stone. The princess fancied she brought from the
      outside world just such comfort as the ray of light or the bird. Her gay,
      friendly smile, her gentle eyes, her voice, her jests, her whole
      personality in fact, her little graceful figure always dressed in simple
      black, must arouse in simple, austere people a feeling of tenderness and
      joy. Every one, looking at her, must think: “God has sent us an
      angel. . . .” And feeling that no one could help thinking this, she
      smiled still more cordially, and tried to look like a bird.
    

      After drinking tea and resting, she went for a walk. The sun was already
      setting. From the monastery garden came a moist fragrance of freshly
      watered mignonette, and from the church floated the soft singing of men’s
      voices, which seemed very pleasant and mournful in the distance. It was
      the evening service. In the dark windows where the little lamps glowed
      gently, in the shadows, in the figure of the old monk sitting at the
      church door with a collecting-box, there was such unruffled peace that the
      princess felt moved to tears.
    

      Outside the gate, in the walk between the wall and the birch-trees where
      there were benches, it was quite evening. The air grew rapidly darker and
      darker. The princess went along the walk, sat on a seat, and sank into
      thought.
    

      She thought how good it would be to settle down for her whole life in this
      monastery where life was as still and unruffled as a summer evening; how
      good it would be to forget the ungrateful, dissipated prince; to forget
      her immense estates, the creditors who worried her every day, her
      misfortunes, her maid Dasha, who had looked at her impertinently that
      morning. It would be nice to sit here on the bench all her life and watch
      through the trunks of the birch-trees the evening mist gathering in
      wreaths in the valley below; the rooks flying home in a black cloud like a
      veil far, far away above the forest; two novices, one astride a piebald
      horse, another on foot driving out the horses for the night and rejoicing
      in their freedom, playing pranks like little children; their youthful
      voices rang out musically in the still air, and she could distinguish
      every word. It is nice to sit and listen to the silence: at one moment the
      wind blows and stirs the tops of the birch-trees, then a frog rustles in
      last year’s leaves, then the clock on the belfry strikes the
      quarter. . . . One might sit without moving, listen and think, and think.
      . . .
    

      An old woman passed by with a wallet on her back. The princess thought
      that it would be nice to stop the old woman and to say something friendly
      and cordial to her, to help her. . . . But the old woman turned the corner
      without once looking round.
    

      Not long afterwards a tall man with a grey beard and a straw hat came
      along the walk. When he came up to the princess, he took off his hat and
      bowed. From the bald patch on his head and his sharp, hooked nose the
      princess recognised him as the doctor, Mihail Ivanovitch, who had been in
      her service at Dubovki. She remembered that some one had told her that his
      wife had died the year before, and she wanted to sympathise with him, to
      console him.
    

      “Doctor, I expect you don’t recognise me?” she said with
      an affable smile.
    

      “Yes, Princess, I recognised you,” said the doctor, taking off
      his hat again.
    

      “Oh, thank you; I was afraid that you, too, had forgotten your
      princess. People only remember their enemies, but they forget their
      friends. Have you, too, come to pray?”
    

      “I am the doctor here, and I have to spend the night at the
      monastery every Saturday.”
    

      “Well, how are you?” said the princess, sighing. “I hear
      that you have lost your wife. What a calamity!”
    

      “Yes, Princess, for me it is a great calamity.”
    

      “There’s nothing for it! We must bear our troubles with
      resignation. Not one hair of a man’s head is lost without the Divine
      Will.”
    

      “Yes, Princess.”
    

      To the princess’s friendly, gentle smile and her sighs the doctor
      responded coldly and dryly: “Yes, Princess.” And the
      expression of his face was cold and dry.
    

      “What else can I say to him?” she wondered.
    

      “How long it is since we met!” she said. “Five years!
      How much water has flowed under the bridge, how many changes in that time;
      it quite frightens one to think of it! You know, I am married. . . . I am
      not a countess now, but a princess. And by now I am separated from my
      husband too.”
    

      “Yes, I heard so.”
    

      “God has sent me many trials. No doubt you have heard, too, that I
      am almost ruined. My Dubovki, Sofyino, and Kiryakovo have all been sold
      for my unhappy husband’s debts. And I have only Baranovo and
      Mihaltsevo left. It’s terrible to look back: how many changes and
      misfortunes of all kinds, how many mistakes!”
    

      “Yes, Princess, many mistakes.”
    

      The princess was a little disconcerted. She knew her mistakes; they were
      all of such a private character that no one but she could think or speak
      of them. She could not resist asking:
    

      “What mistakes are you thinking about?”
    

      “You referred to them, so you know them . . .” answered the
      doctor, and he smiled. “Why talk about them!”
    

      “No; tell me, doctor. I shall be very grateful to you. And please
      don’t stand on ceremony with me. I love to hear the truth.”
    

      “I am not your judge, Princess.”
    

      “Not my judge! What a tone you take! You must know something about
      me. Tell me!”
    

      “If you really wish it, very well. Only I regret to say I’m
      not clever at talking, and people can’t always understand me.”
    

      The doctor thought a moment and began:
    

      “A lot of mistakes; but the most important of them, in my opinion,
      was the general spirit that prevailed on all your estates. You see, I don’t
      know how to express myself. I mean chiefly the lack of love, the aversion
      for people that was felt in absolutely everything. Your whole system of
      life was built upon that aversion. Aversion for the human voice, for
      faces, for heads, steps . . . in fact, for everything that makes up a
      human being. At all the doors and on the stairs there stand sleek, rude,
      and lazy grooms in livery to prevent badly dressed persons from entering
      the house; in the hall there are chairs with high backs so that the
      footmen waiting there, during balls and receptions, may not soil the walls
      with their heads; in every room there are thick carpets that no human step
      may be heard; every one who comes in is infallibly warned to speak as
      softly and as little as possible, and to say nothing that might have a
      disagreeable effect on the nerves or the imagination. And in your room you
      don’t shake hands with any one or ask him to sit down— just as
      you didn’t shake hands with me or ask me to sit down. . . .”
    

      “By all means, if you like,” said the princess, smiling and
      holding out her hand. “Really, to be cross about such trifles. . . .”
    

      “But I am not cross,” laughed the doctor, but at once he
      flushed, took off his hat, and waving it about, began hotly: “To be
      candid, I’ve long wanted an opportunity to tell you all I think. . .
      . That is, I want to tell you that you look upon the mass of mankind from
      the Napoleonic standpoint as food for the cannon. But Napoleon had at
      least some idea; you have nothing except aversion.”
    

      “I have an aversion for people?” smiled the princess,
      shrugging her shoulders in astonishment. “I have!”
    

      “Yes, you! You want facts? By all means. In Mihaltsevo three former
      cooks of yours, who have gone blind in your kitchens from the heat of the
      stove, are living upon charity. All the health and strength and good looks
      that is found on your hundreds of thousands of acres is taken by you and
      your parasites for your grooms, your footmen, and your coachmen. All these
      two-legged cattle are trained to be flunkeys, overeat themselves, grow
      coarse, lose the ‘image and likeness,’ in fact. . . . Young
      doctors, agricultural experts, teachers, intellectual workers generally—think
      of it!—are torn away from their honest work and forced for a crust
      of bread to take part in all sorts of mummeries which make every decent
      man feel ashamed! Some young men cannot be in your service for three years
      without becoming hypocrites, toadies, sneaks. . . . Is that a good thing?
      Your Polish superintendents, those abject spies, all those Kazimers and
      Kaetans, go hunting about on your hundreds of thousands of acres from
      morning to night, and to please you try to get three skins off one ox.
      Excuse me, I speak disconnectedly, but that doesn’t matter. You don’t
      look upon the simple people as human beings. And even the princes, counts,
      and bishops who used to come and see you, you looked upon simply as
      decorative figures, not as living beings. But the worst of all, the thing
      that most revolts me, is having a fortune of over a million and doing
      nothing for other people, nothing!”
    

      The princess sat amazed, aghast, offended, not knowing what to say or how
      to behave. She had never before been spoken to in such a tone. The doctor’s
      unpleasant, angry voice and his clumsy, faltering phrases made a harsh
      clattering noise in her ears and her head. Then she began to feel as
      though the gesticulating doctor was hitting her on the head with his hat.
    

      “It’s not true!” she articulated softly, in an imploring
      voice. “I’ve done a great deal of good for other people; you
      know it yourself!”
    

      “Nonsense!” cried the doctor. “Can you possibly go on
      thinking of your philanthropic work as something genuine and useful, and
      not a mere mummery? It was a farce from beginning to end; it was playing
      at loving your neighbour, the most open farce which even children and
      stupid peasant women saw through! Take for instance your— what was
      it called?—house for homeless old women without relations, of which
      you made me something like a head doctor, and of which you were the
      patroness. Mercy on us! What a charming institution it was! A house was
      built with parquet floors and a weathercock on the roof; a dozen old women
      were collected from the villages and made to sleep under blankets and
      sheets of Dutch linen, and given toffee to eat.”
    

      The doctor gave a malignant chuckle into his hat, and went on speaking
      rapidly and stammering:
    

      “It was a farce! The attendants kept the sheets and the blankets
      under lock and key, for fear the old women should soil them—‘Let
      the old devil’s pepper-pots sleep on the floor.’ The old women
      did not dare to sit down on the beds, to put on their jackets, to walk
      over the polished floors. Everything was kept for show and hidden away
      from the old women as though they were thieves, and the old women were
      clothed and fed on the sly by other people’s charity, and prayed to
      God night and day to be released from their prison and from the canting
      exhortations of the sleek rascals to whose care you committed them. And
      what did the managers do? It was simply charming! About twice a week there
      would be thirty-five thousand messages to say that the princess—that
      is, you—were coming to the home next day. That meant that next day I
      had to abandon my patients, dress up and be on parade. Very good; I
      arrive. The old women, in everything clean and new, are already drawn up
      in a row, waiting. Near them struts the old garrison rat—the
      superintendent with his mawkish, sneaking smile. The old women yawn and
      exchange glances, but are afraid to complain. We wait. The junior steward
      gallops up. Half an hour later the senior steward; then the superintendent
      of the accounts’ office, then another, and then another of them . .
      . they keep arriving endlessly. They all have mysterious, solemn faces. We
      wait and wait, shift from one leg to another, look at the clock—all
      this in monumental silence because we all hate each other like poison. One
      hour passes, then a second, and then at last the carriage is seen in the
      distance, and . . . and . . .”
    

      The doctor went off into a shrill laugh and brought out in a shrill voice:
    

      “You get out of the carriage, and the old hags, at the word of
      command from the old garrison rat, begin chanting: ‘The Glory of our
      Lord in Zion the tongue of man cannot express. . .’ A pretty scene,
      wasn’t it?”
    

      The doctor went off into a bass chuckle, and waved his hand as though to
      signify that he could not utter another word for laughing. He laughed
      heavily, harshly, with clenched teeth, as ill-natured people laugh; and
      from his voice, from his face, from his glittering, rather insolent eyes
      it could be seen that he had a profound contempt for the princess, for the
      home, and for the old women. There was nothing amusing or laughable in all
      that he described so clumsily and coarsely, but he laughed with
      satisfaction, even with delight.
    

      “And the school?” he went on, panting from laughter. “Do
      you remember how you wanted to teach peasant children yourself? You must
      have taught them very well, for very soon the children all ran away, so
      that they had to be thrashed and bribed to come and be taught. And you
      remember how you wanted to feed with your own hands the infants whose
      mothers were working in the fields. You went about the village crying
      because the infants were not at your disposal, as the mothers would take
      them to the fields with them. Then the village foreman ordered the mothers
      by turns to leave their infants behind for your entertainment. A strange
      thing! They all ran away from your benevolence like mice from a cat! And
      why was it? It’s very simple. Not because our people are ignorant
      and ungrateful, as you always explained it to yourself, but because in all
      your fads, if you’ll excuse the word, there wasn’t a ha’p’orth
      of love and kindness! There was nothing but the desire to amuse yourself
      with living puppets, nothing else. . . . A person who does not feel the
      difference between a human being and a lap-dog ought not to go in for
      philanthropy. I assure you, there’s a great difference between human
      beings and lap-dogs!”
    

      The princess’s heart was beating dreadfully; there was a thudding in
      her ears, and she still felt as though the doctor were beating her on the
      head with his hat. The doctor talked quickly, excitedly, and uncouthly,
      stammering and gesticulating unnecessarily. All she grasped was that she
      was spoken to by a coarse, ill-bred, spiteful, and ungrateful man; but
      what he wanted of her and what he was talking about, she could not
      understand.
    

      “Go away!” she said in a tearful voice, putting up her hands
      to protect her head from the doctor’s hat; “go away!”
    

      “And how you treat your servants!” the doctor went on,
      indignantly. “You treat them as the lowest scoundrels, and don’t
      look upon them as human beings. For example, allow me to ask, why did you
      dismiss me? For ten years I worked for your father and afterwards for you,
      honestly, without vacations or holidays. I gained the love of all for more
      than seventy miles round, and suddenly one fine day I am informed that I
      am no longer wanted. What for? I’ve no idea to this day. I, a doctor
      of medicine, a gentleman by birth, a student of the Moscow University,
      father of a family—am such a petty, insignificant insect that you
      can kick me out without explaining the reason! Why stand on ceremony with
      me! I heard afterwards that my wife went without my knowledge three times
      to intercede with you for me—you wouldn’t receive her. I am
      told she cried in your hall. And I shall never forgive her for it, never!”
    

      The doctor paused and clenched his teeth, making an intense effort to
      think of something more to say, very unpleasant and vindictive. He thought
      of something, and his cold, frowning face suddenly brightened.
    

      “Take your attitude to this monastery!” he said with avidity.
      “You’ve never spared any one, and the holier the place, the
      more chance of its suffering from your loving-kindness and angelic
      sweetness. Why do you come here? What do you want with the monks here,
      allow me to ask you? What is Hecuba to you or you to Hecuba? It’s
      another farce, another amusement for you, another sacrilege against human
      dignity, and nothing more. Why, you don’t believe in the monks’
      God; you’ve a God of your own in your heart, whom you’ve
      evolved for yourself at spiritualist sÃ©ances. You look with condescension
      upon the ritual of the Church; you don’t go to mass or vespers; you
      sleep till midday. . . . Why do you come here? . . . You come with a God
      of your own into a monastery you have nothing to do with, and you imagine
      that the monks look upon it as a very great honour. To be sure they do!
      You’d better ask, by the way, what your visits cost the monastery.
      You were graciously pleased to arrive here this evening, and a messenger
      from your estate arrived on horseback the day before yesterday to warn
      them of your coming. They were the whole day yesterday getting the rooms
      ready and expecting you. This morning your advance-guard arrived—an
      insolent maid, who keeps running across the courtyard, rustling her
      skirts, pestering them with questions, giving orders. . . . I can’t
      endure it! The monks have been on the lookout all day, for if you were not
      met with due ceremony, there would be trouble! You’d complain to the
      bishop! ‘The monks don’t like me, your holiness; I don’t
      know what I’ve done to displease them. It’s true I’m a
      great sinner, but I’m so unhappy!’ Already one monastery has
      been in hot water over you. The Father Superior is a busy, learned man; he
      hasn’t a free moment, and you keep sending for him to come to your
      rooms. Not a trace of respect for age or for rank! If at least you were a
      bountiful giver to the monastery, one wouldn’t resent it so much,
      but all this time the monks have not received a hundred roubles from you!”
    

      Whenever people worried the princess, misunderstood her, or mortified her,
      and when she did not know what to say or do, she usually began to cry. And
      on this occasion, too, she ended by hiding her face in her hands and
      crying aloud in a thin treble like a child. The doctor suddenly stopped
      and looked at her. His face darkened and grew stern.
    

      “Forgive me, Princess,” he said in a hollow voice. “I’ve
      given way to a malicious feeling and forgotten myself. It was not right.”
    

      And coughing in an embarrassed way, he walked away quickly, without
      remembering to put his hat on.
    

      Stars were already twinkling in the sky. The moon must have been rising on
      the further side of the monastery, for the sky was clear, soft, and
      transparent. Bats were flitting noiselessly along the white monastery
      wall.
    

      The clock slowly struck three quarters, probably a quarter to nine. The
      princess got up and walked slowly to the gate. She felt wounded and was
      crying, and she felt that the trees and the stars and even the bats were
      pitying her, and that the clock struck musically only to express its
      sympathy with her. She cried and thought how nice it would be to go into a
      monastery for the rest of her life. On still summer evenings she would
      walk alone through the avenues, insulted, injured, misunderstood by
      people, and only God and the starry heavens would see the martyr’s
      tears. The evening service was still going on in the church. The princess
      stopped and listened to the singing; how beautiful the singing sounded in
      the still darkness! How sweet to weep and suffer to the sound of that
      singing!
    

      Going into her rooms, she looked at her tear-stained face in the glass and
      powdered it, then she sat down to supper. The monks knew that she liked
      pickled sturgeon, little mushrooms, Malaga and plain honey-cakes that left
      a taste of cypress in the mouth, and every time she came they gave her all
      these dishes. As she ate the mushrooms and drank the Malaga, the princess
      dreamed of how she would be finally ruined and deserted—how all her
      stewards, bailiffs, clerks, and maid-servants for whom she had done so
      much, would be false to her, and begin to say rude things; how people all
      the world over would set upon her, speak ill of her, jeer at her. She
      would renounce her title, would renounce society and luxury, and would go
      into a convent without one word of reproach to any one; she would pray for
      her enemies—and then they would all understand her and come to beg
      her forgiveness, but by that time it would be too late. . . .
    

      After supper she knelt down in the corner before the ikon and read two
      chapters of the Gospel. Then her maid made her bed and she got into it.
      Stretching herself under the white quilt, she heaved a sweet, deep sigh,
      as one sighs after crying, closed her eyes, and began to fall asleep.
    

      In the morning she waked up and glanced at her watch. It was half-past
      nine. On the carpet near the bed was a bright, narrow streak of sunlight
      from a ray which came in at the window and dimly lighted up the room.
      Flies were buzzing behind the black curtain at the window. “It’s
      early,” thought the princess, and she closed her eyes.
    

      Stretching and lying snug in her bed, she recalled her meeting yesterday
      with the doctor and all the thoughts with which she had gone to sleep the
      night before: she remembered she was unhappy. Then she thought of her
      husband living in Petersburg, her stewards, doctors, neighbours, the
      officials of her acquaintance . . . a long procession of familiar
      masculine faces passed before her imagination. She smiled and thought, if
      only these people could see into her heart and understand her, they would
      all be at her feet.
    

      At a quarter past eleven she called her maid.
    

      “Help me to dress, Dasha,” she said languidly. “But go
      first and tell them to get out the horses. I must set off for Klavdia
      Nikolaevna’s.”
    

      Going out to get into the carriage, she bGlinked at the glaring daylight
      and laughed with pleasure: it was a wonderfully fine day! As she scanned
      from her half-closed eyes the monks who had gathered round the steps to
      see her off, she nodded graciously and said:
    

      “Good-bye, my friends! Till the day after tomorrow.”
    

      It was an agreeable surprise to her that the doctor was with the monks by
      the steps. His face was pale and severe.
    

      “Princess,” he said with a guilty smile, taking off his hat,
      “I’ve been waiting here a long time to see you. Forgive me,
      for God’s sake. . . . I was carried away yesterday by an evil,
      vindictive feeling and I talked . . . nonsense. In short, I beg your
      pardon.”
    

      The princess smiled graciously, and held out her hand for him to kiss. He
      kissed it, turning red.
    

      Trying to look like a bird, the princess fluttered into the carriage and
      nodded in all directions. There was a gay, warm, serene feeling in her
      heart, and she felt herself that her smile was particularly soft and
      friendly. As the carriage rolled towards the gates, and afterwards along
      the dusty road past huts and gardens, past long trains of waggons and
      strings of pilgrims on their way to the monastery, she still screwed up
      her eyes and smiled softly. She was thinking there was no higher bliss
      than to bring warmth, light, and joy wherever one went, to forgive
      injuries, to smile graciously on one’s enemies. The peasants she
      passed bowed to her, the carriage rustled softly, clouds of dust rose from
      under the wheels and floated over the golden rye, and it seemed to the
      princess that her body was swaying not on carriage cushions but on clouds,
      and that she herself was like a light, transparent little cloud. . . .
    

      “How happy I am!” she murmured, shutting her eyes. “How
      happy I am!”
    











      THE CHEMIST’S WIFE
    

THE little town of
      B——, consisting of two or three crooked streets, was sound
      asleep. There was a complete stillness in the motionless air. Nothing
      could be heard but far away, outside the town no doubt, the barking of a
      dog in a thin, hoarse tenor. It was close upon daybreak.
    

      Everything had long been asleep. The only person not asleep was the young
      wife of Tchernomordik, a qualified dispenser who kept a chemist’s
      shop at B——. She had gone to bed and got up again three times,
      but could not sleep, she did not know why. She sat at the open window in
      her nightdress and looked into the street. She felt bored, depressed,
      vexed . . . so vexed that she felt quite inclined to cry—again she
      did not know why. There seemed to be a lump in her chest that kept rising
      into her throat. . . . A few paces behind her Tchernomordik lay curled up
      close to the wall, snoring sweetly. A greedy flea was stabbing the bridge
      of his nose, but he did not feel it, and was positively smiling, for he
      was dreaming that every one in the town had a cough, and was buying from
      him the King of Denmark’s cough-drops. He could not have been
      wakened now by pinpricks or by cannon or by caresses.
    

      The chemist’s shop was almost at the extreme end of the town, so
      that the chemist’s wife could see far into the fields. She could see
      the eastern horizon growing pale by degrees, then turning crimson as
      though from a great fire. A big broad-faced moon peeped out unexpectedly
      from behind bushes in the distance. It was red (as a rule when the moon
      emerges from behind bushes it appears to be blushing).
    

      Suddenly in the stillness of the night there came the sounds of footsteps
      and a jingle of spurs. She could hear voices.
    

      “That must be the officers going home to the camp from the Police
      Captain’s,” thought the chemist’s wife.
    

      Soon afterwards two figures wearing officers’ white tunics came into
      sight: one big and tall, the other thinner and shorter. . . . They
      slouched along by the fence, dragging one leg after the other and talking
      loudly together. As they passed the chemist’s shop, they walked more
      slowly than ever, and glanced up at the windows.
    

      “It smells like a chemist’s,” said the thin one. “And
      so it is! Ah, I remember. . . . I came here last week to buy some
      castor-oil. There’s a chemist here with a sour face and the jawbone
      of an ass! Such a jawbone, my dear fellow! It must have been a jawbone
      like that Samson killed the Philistines with.”
    

      “M’yes,” said the big one in a bass voice. “The
      pharmacist is asleep. And his wife is asleep too. She is a pretty woman,
      Obtyosov.”
    

      “I saw her. I liked her very much. . . . Tell me, doctor, can she
      possibly love that jawbone of an ass? Can she?”
    

      “No, most likely she does not love him,” sighed the doctor,
      speaking as though he were sorry for the chemist. “The little woman
      is asleep behind the window, Obtyosov, what? Tossing with the heat, her
      little mouth half open . . . and one little foot hanging out of bed. I bet
      that fool the chemist doesn’t realise what a lucky fellow he is. . .
      . No doubt he sees no difference between a woman and a bottle of carbolic!”
    

      “I say, doctor,” said the officer, stopping. “Let us go
      into the shop and buy something. Perhaps we shall see her.”
    

      “What an idea—in the night!”
    

      “What of it? They are obliged to serve one even at night. My dear
      fellow, let us go in!”
    

      “If you like. . . .”
    

      The chemist’s wife, hiding behind the curtain, heard a muffled ring.
      Looking round at her husband, who was smiling and snoring sweetly as
      before, she threw on her dress, slid her bare feet into her slippers, and
      ran to the shop.
    

      On the other side of the glass door she could see two shadows. The chemist’s
      wife turned up the lamp and hurried to the door to open it, and now she
      felt neither vexed nor bored nor inclined to cry, though her heart was
      thumping. The big doctor and the slender Obtyosov walked in. Now she could
      get a view of them. The doctor was corpulent and swarthy; he wore a beard
      and was slow in his movements. At the slightest motion his tunic seemed as
      though it would crack, and perspiration came on to his face. The officer
      was rosy, clean-shaven, feminine-looking, and as supple as an English
      whip.
    

      “What may I give you?” asked the chemist’s wife, holding
      her dress across her bosom.
    

      “Give us . . . er-er . . . four pennyworth of peppermint lozenges!”
    

      Without haste the chemist’s wife took down a jar from a shelf and
      began weighing out lozenges. The customers stared fixedly at her back; the
      doctor screwed up his eyes like a well-fed cat, while the lieutenant was
      very grave.
    

      “It’s the first time I’ve seen a lady serving in a
      chemist’s shop,” observed the doctor.
    

      “There’s nothing out of the way in it,” replied the
      chemist’s wife, looking out of the corner of her eye at the
      rosy-cheeked officer. “My husband has no assistant, and I always
      help him.”
    

      “To be sure. . . . You have a charming little shop! What a number of
      different . . . jars! And you are not afraid of moving about among the
      poisons? Brrr!”
    

      The chemist’s wife sealed up the parcel and handed it to the doctor.
      Obtyosov gave her the money. Half a minute of silence followed. . . . The
      men exchanged glances, took a step towards the door, then looked at one
      another again.
    

      “Will you give me two pennyworth of soda?” said the doctor.
    

      Again the chemist’s wife slowly and languidly raised her hand to the
      shelf.
    

      “Haven’t you in the shop anything . . . such as . . .”
      muttered Obtyosov, moving his fingers, “something, so to say,
      allegorical . . . revivifying . . . seltzer-water, for instance. Have you
      any seltzer-water?”
    

      “Yes,” answered the chemist’s wife.
    

      “Bravo! You’re a fairy, not a woman! Give us three bottles!”
    

      The chemist’s wife hurriedly sealed up the soda and vanished through
      the door into the darkness.
    

      “A peach!” said the doctor, with a wink. “You wouldn’t
      find a pineapple like that in the island of Madeira! Eh? What do you say?
      Do you hear the snoring, though? That’s his worship the chemist
      enjoying sweet repose.”
    

      A minute later the chemist’s wife came back and set five bottles on
      the counter. She had just been in the cellar, and so was flushed and
      rather excited.
    

      “Sh-sh! . . . quietly!” said Obtyosov when, after uncorking
      the bottles, she dropped the corkscrew. “Don’t make such a
      noise; you’ll wake your husband.”
    

      “Well, what if I do wake him?”
    

      “He is sleeping so sweetly . . . he must be dreaming of you. . . .
      To your health!”
    

      “Besides,” boomed the doctor, hiccupping after the
      seltzer-water, “husbands are such a dull business that it would be
      very nice of them to be always asleep. How good a drop of red wine would
      be in this water!”
    

      “What an idea!” laughed the chemist’s wife.
    

      “That would be splendid. What a pity they don’t sell spirits
      in chemist’s shops! Though you ought to sell wine as a medicine.
      Have you any vinum gallicum rubrum?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Well, then, give us some! Bring it here, damn it!”
    

      “How much do you want?”
    

      “Quantum satis. . . . Give us an ounce each in the water, and
      afterwards we’ll see. . . . Obtyosov, what do you say? First with
      water and afterwards per se. . . .”
    

      The doctor and Obtyosov sat down to the counter, took off their caps, and
      began drinking the wine.
    

      “The wine, one must admit, is wretched stuff! Vinum nastissimum!
      Though in the presence of . . . er . . . it tastes like nectar. You are
      enchanting, madam! In imagination I kiss your hand.”
    

      “I would give a great deal to do so not in imagination,” said
      Obtyosov. “On my honour, I’d give my life.”
    

      “That’s enough,” said Madame Tchernomordik, flushing and
      assuming a serious expression.
    

      “What a flirt you are, though!” the doctor laughed softly,
      looking slyly at her from under his brows. “Your eyes seem to be
      firing shot: piff-paff! I congratulate you: you’ve conquered! We are
      vanquished!”
    

      The chemist’s wife looked at their ruddy faces, listened to their
      chatter, and soon she, too, grew quite lively. Oh, she felt so gay! She
      entered into the conversation, she laughed, flirted, and even, after
      repeated requests from the customers, drank two ounces of wine.
    

      “You officers ought to come in oftener from the camp,” she
      said; “it’s awful how dreary it is here. I’m simply
      dying of it.”
    

      “I should think so!” said the doctor indignantly. “Such
      a peach, a miracle of nature, thrown away in the wilds! How well
      Griboyedov said, ‘Into the wilds, to Saratov’! It’s time
      for us to be off, though. Delighted to have made your acquaintance . . .
      very. How much do we owe you?”
    

      The chemist’s wife raised her eyes to the ceiling and her lips moved
      for some time.
    

      “Twelve roubles forty-eight kopecks,” she said.
    

      Obtyosov took out of his pocket a fat pocket-book, and after fumbling for
      some time among the notes, paid.
    

      “Your husband’s sleeping sweetly . . . he must be dreaming,”
      he muttered, pressing her hand at parting.
    

      “I don’t like to hear silly remarks. . . .”
    

      “What silly remarks? On the contrary, it’s not silly at all .
      . . even Shakespeare said: ‘Happy is he who in his youth is young.’”
    

      “Let go of my hand.”
    

      At last after much talk and after kissing the lady’s hand at
      parting, the customers went out of the shop irresolutely, as though they
      were wondering whether they had not forgotten something.
    

      She ran quickly into the bedroom and sat down in the same place. She saw
      the doctor and the officer, on coming out of the shop, walk lazily away a
      distance of twenty paces; then they stopped and began whispering together.
      What about? Her heart throbbed, there was a pulsing in her temples, and
      why she did not know. . . . Her heart beat violently as though those two
      whispering outside were deciding her fate.
    

      Five minutes later the doctor parted from Obtyosov and walked on, while
      Obtyosov came back. He walked past the shop once and a second time. . . .
      He would stop near the door and then take a few steps again. At last the
      bell tinkled discreetly.
    

      “What? Who is there?” the chemist’s wife heard her
      husband’s voice suddenly. “There’s a ring at the bell,
      and you don’t hear it,” he said severely. “Is that the
      way to do things?”
    

      He got up, put on his dressing-gown, and staggering, half asleep, flopped
      in his slippers to the shop.
    

      “What . . . is it?” he asked Obtyosov.
    

      “Give me . . . give me four pennyworth of peppermint lozenges.”
    

      Sniffing continually, yawning, dropping asleep as he moved, and knocking
      his knees against the counter, the chemist went to the shelf and reached
      down the jar.
    

      Two minutes later the chemist’s wife saw Obtyosov go out of the
      shop, and, after he had gone some steps, she saw him throw the packet of
      peppermints on the dusty road. The doctor came from behind a corner to
      meet him. . . . They met and, gesticulating, vanished in the morning mist.
    

      “How unhappy I am!” said the chemist’s wife, looking
      angrily at her husband, who was undressing quickly to get into bed again.
      “Oh, how unhappy I am!” she repeated, suddenly melting into
      bitter tears. “And nobody knows, nobody knows. . . .”
    

      “I forgot fourpence on the counter,” muttered the chemist,
      pulling the quilt over him. “Put it away in the till, please. . . .”
    

      And at once he fell asleep again.
    

 


The Schoolmistress and Other Stories

 



  


      THE SCHOOLMISTRESS
    

AT half-past eight
      they drove out of the town.
    

      The highroad was dry, a lovely April sun was shining warmly, but the snow
      was still lying in the ditches and in the woods. Winter, dark, long, and
      spiteful, was hardly over; spring had come all of a sudden. But neither
      the warmth nor the languid transparent woods, warmed by the breath of
      spring, nor the black flocks of birds flying over the huge puddles that
      were like lakes, nor the marvelous fathomless sky, into which it seemed
      one would have gone away so joyfully, presented anything new or
      interesting to Marya Vassilyevna who was sitting in the cart. For thirteen
      years she had been schoolmistress, and there was no reckoning how many
      times during all those years she had been to the town for her salary; and
      whether it were spring as now, or a rainy autumn evening, or winter, it
      was all the same to her, and she always—invariably—longed for
      one thing only, to get to the end of her journey as quickly as could be.
    

      She felt as though she had been living in that part of the country for
      ages and ages, for a hundred years, and it seemed to her that she knew
      every stone, every tree on the road from the town to her school. Her past
      was here, her present was here, and she could imagine no other future than
      the school, the road to the town and back again, and again the school and
      again the road....
    

      She had got out of the habit of thinking of her past before she became a
      schoolmistress, and had almost forgotten it. She had once had a father and
      mother; they had lived in Moscow in a big flat near the Red Gate, but of
      all that life there was left in her memory only something vague and fluid
      like a dream. Her father had died when she was ten years old, and her
      mother had died soon after.... She had a brother, an officer; at first
      they used to write to each other, then her brother had given up answering
      her letters, he had got out of the way of writing. Of her old belongings,
      all that was left was a photograph of her mother, but it had grown dim
      from the dampness of the school, and now nothing could be seen but the
      hair and the eyebrows.
    

      When they had driven a couple of miles, old Semyon, who was driving,
      turned round and said:
    

      “They have caught a government clerk in the town. They have taken
      him away. The story is that with some Germans he killed Alexeyev, the
      Mayor, in Moscow.”
    

      “Who told you that?”
    

      “They were reading it in the paper, in Ivan Ionov’s tavern.”
    

      And again they were silent for a long time. Marya Vassilyevna thought of
      her school, of the examination that was coming soon, and of the girl and
      four boys she was sending up for it. And just as she was thinking about
      the examination, she was overtaken by a neighboring landowner called Hanov
      in a carriage with four horses, the very man who had been examiner in her
      school the year before. When he came up to her he recognized her and
      bowed.
    

      “Good-morning,” he said to her. “You are driving home, I
      suppose.”
    

      This Hanov, a man of forty with a listless expression and a face that
      showed signs of wear, was beginning to look old, but was still handsome
      and admired by women. He lived in his big homestead alone, and was not in
      the service; and people used to say of him that he did nothing at home but
      walk up and down the room whistling, or play chess with his old footman.
      People said, too, that he drank heavily. And indeed at the examination the
      year before the very papers he brought with him smelt of wine and scent.
      He had been dressed all in new clothes on that occasion, and Marya
      Vassilyevna thought him very attractive, and all the while she sat beside
      him she had felt embarrassed. She was accustomed to see frigid and
      sensible examiners at the school, while this one did not remember a single
      prayer, or know what to ask questions about, and was exceedingly courteous
      and delicate, giving nothing but the highest marks.
    

      “I am going to visit Bakvist,” he went on, addressing Marya
      Vassilyevna, “but I am told he is not at home.”
    

      They turned off the highroad into a by-road to the village, Hanov leading
      the way and Semyon following. The four horses moved at a walking pace,
      with effort dragging the heavy carriage through the mud. Semyon tacked
      from side to side, keeping to the edge of the road, at one time through a
      snowdrift, at another through a pool, often jumping out of the cart and
      helping the horse. Marya Vassilyevna was still thinking about the school,
      wondering whether the arithmetic questions at the examination would be
      difficult or easy. And she felt annoyed with the Zemstvo board at which
      she had found no one the day before. How unbusiness-like! Here she had
      been asking them for the last two years to dismiss the watchman, who did
      nothing, was rude to her, and hit the schoolboys; but no one paid any
      attention. It was hard to find the president at the office, and when one
      did find him he would say with tears in his eyes that he hadn’t a
      moment to spare; the inspector visited the school at most once in three
      years, and knew nothing whatever about his work, as he had been in the
      Excise Duties Department, and had received the post of school inspector
      through influence. The School Council met very rarely, and there was no
      knowing where it met; the school guardian was an almost illiterate
      peasant, the head of a tanning business, unintelligent, rude, and a great
      friend of the watchman’s—and goodness knows to whom she could
      appeal with complaints or inquiries....
    

      “He really is handsome,” she thought, glancing at Hanov.
    

      The road grew worse and worse.... They drove into the wood. Here there was
      no room to turn round, the wheels sank deeply in, water splashed and
      gurgled through them, and sharp twigs struck them in the face.
    

      “What a road!” said Hanov, and he laughed.
    

      The schoolmistress looked at him and could not understand why this queer
      man lived here. What could his money, his interesting appearance, his
      refined bearing do for him here, in this mud, in this God-forsaken, dreary
      place? He got no special advantages out of life, and here, like Semyon,
      was driving at a jog-trot on an appalling road and enduring the same
      discomforts. Why live here if one could live in Petersburg or abroad? And
      one would have thought it would be nothing for a rich man like him to make
      a good road instead of this bad one, to avoid enduring this misery and
      seeing the despair on the faces of his coachman and Semyon; but he only
      laughed, and apparently did not mind, and wanted no better life. He was
      kind, soft, naive, and he did not understand this coarse life, just as at
      the examination he did not know the prayers. He subscribed nothing to the
      schools but globes, and genuinely regarded himself as a useful person and
      a prominent worker in the cause of popular education. And what use were
      his globes here?
    

      “Hold on, Vassilyevna!” said Semyon.
    

      The cart lurched violently and was on the point of upsetting; something
      heavy rolled on to Marya Vassilyevna’s feet—it was her parcel
      of purchases. There was a steep ascent uphill through the clay; here in
      the winding ditches rivulets were gurgling. The water seemed to have
      gnawed away the road; and how could one get along here! The horses
      breathed hard. Hanov got out of his carriage and walked at the side of the
      road in his long overcoat. He was hot.
    

      “What a road!” he said, and laughed again. “It would
      soon smash up one’s carriage.”
    

      “Nobody obliges you to drive about in such weather,” said
      Semyon surlily. “You should stay at home.”
    

      “I am dull at home, grandfather. I don’t like staying at home.”
    

      Beside old Semyon he looked graceful and vigorous, but yet in his walk
      there was something just perceptible which betrayed in him a being already
      touched by decay, weak, and on the road to ruin. And all at once there was
      a whiff of spirits in the wood. Marya Vassilyevna was filled with dread
      and pity for this man going to his ruin for no visible cause or reason,
      and it came into her mind that if she had been his wife or sister she
      would have devoted her whole life to saving him from ruin. His wife! Life
      was so ordered that here he was living in his great house alone, and she
      was living in a God-forsaken village alone, and yet for some reason the
      mere thought that he and she might be close to one another and equals
      seemed impossible and absurd. In reality, life was arranged and human
      relations were complicated so utterly beyond all understanding that when
      one thought about it one felt uncanny and one’s heart sank.
    

      “And it is beyond all understanding,” she thought, “why
      God gives beauty, this graciousness, and sad, sweet eyes to weak, unlucky,
      useless people—why they are so charming.”
    

      “Here we must turn off to the right,” said Hanov, getting into
      his carriage. “Good-by! I wish you all things good!”
    

      And again she thought of her pupils, of the examination, of the watchman,
      of the School Council; and when the wind brought the sound of the
      retreating carriage these thoughts were mingled with others. She longed to
      think of beautiful eyes, of love, of the happiness which would never
      be....
    

      His wife? It was cold in the morning, there was no one to heat the stove,
      the watchman disappeared; the children came in as soon as it was light,
      bringing in snow and mud and making a noise: it was all so inconvenient,
      so comfortless. Her abode consisted of one little room and the kitchen
      close by. Her head ached every day after her work, and after dinner she
      had heart-burn. She had to collect money from the school-children for wood
      and for the watchman, and to give it to the school guardian, and then to
      entreat him—that overfed, insolent peasant—for God’s
      sake to send her wood. And at night she dreamed of examinations, peasants,
      snowdrifts. And this life was making her grow old and coarse, making her
      ugly, angular, and awkward, as though she were made of lead. She was
      always afraid, and she would get up from her seat and not venture to sit
      down in the presence of a member of the Zemstvo or the school guardian.
      And she used formal, deferential expressions when she spoke of any one of
      them. And no one thought her attractive, and life was passing drearily,
      without affection, without friendly sympathy, without interesting
      acquaintances. How awful it would have been in her position if she had
      fallen in love!
    

      “Hold on, Vassilyevna!”
    

      Again a sharp ascent uphill....
    

      She had become a schoolmistress from necessity, without feeling any
      vocation for it; and she had never thought of a vocation, of serving the
      cause of enlightenment; and it always seemed to her that what was most
      important in her work was not the children, nor enlightenment, but the
      examinations. And what time had she for thinking of vocation, of serving
      the cause of enlightenment? Teachers, badly paid doctors, and their
      assistants, with their terribly hard work, have not even the comfort of
      thinking that they are serving an idea or the people, as their heads are
      always stuffed with thoughts of their daily bread, of wood for the fire,
      of bad roads, of illnesses. It is a hard-working, an uninteresting life,
      and only silent, patient cart-horses like Mary Vassilyevna could put up
      with it for long; the lively, nervous, impressionable people who talked
      about vocation and serving the idea were soon weary of it and gave up the
      work.
    

      Semyon kept picking out the driest and shortest way, first by a meadow,
      then by the backs of the village huts; but in one place the peasants would
      not let them pass, in another it was the priest’s land and they
      could not cross it, in another Ivan Ionov had bought a plot from the
      landowner and had dug a ditch round it. They kept having to turn back.
    

      They reached Nizhneye Gorodistche. Near the tavern on the dung-strewn
      earth, where the snow was still lying, there stood wagons that had brought
      great bottles of crude sulphuric acid. There were a great many people in
      the tavern, all drivers, and there was a smell of vodka, tobacco, and
      sheepskins. There was a loud noise of conversation and the banging of the
      swing-door. Through the wall, without ceasing for a moment, came the sound
      of a concertina being played in the shop. Marya Vassilyevna sat down and
      drank some tea, while at the next table peasants were drinking vodka and
      beer, perspiring from the tea they had just swallowed and the stifling
      fumes of the tavern.
    

      “I say, Kuzma!” voices kept shouting in confusion. “What
      there!” “The Lord bless us!” “Ivan Dementyitch, I
      can tell you that!” “Look out, old man!”
    

      A little pock-marked man with a black beard, who was quite drunk, was
      suddenly surprised by something and began using bad language.
    

      “What are you swearing at, you there?” Semyon, who was sitting
      some way off, responded angrily. “Don’t you see the young
      lady?”
    

      “The young lady!” someone mimicked in another corner.
    

      “Swinish crow!”
    

      “We meant nothing...” said the little man in confusion.
      “I beg your pardon. We pay with our money and the young lady with
      hers. Good-morning!”
    

      “Good-morning,” answered the schoolmistress.
    

      “And we thank you most feelingly.”
    

      Marya Vassilyevna drank her tea with satisfaction, and she, too, began
      turning red like the peasants, and fell to thinking again about firewood,
      about the watchman....
    

      “Stay, old man,” she heard from the next table, “it’s
      the schoolmistress from Vyazovye.... We know her; she’s a good young
      lady.”
    

      “She’s all right!”
    

      The swing-door was continually banging, some coming in, others going out.
      Marya Vassilyevna sat on, thinking all the time of the same things, while
      the concertina went on playing and playing. The patches of sunshine had
      been on the floor, then they passed to the counter, to the wall, and
      disappeared altogether; so by the sun it was past midday. The peasants at
      the next table were getting ready to go. The little man, somewhat
      unsteadily, went up to Marya Vassilyevna and held out his hand to her;
      following his example, the others shook hands, too, at parting, and went
      out one after another, and the swing-door squeaked and slammed nine times.
    

      “Vassilyevna, get ready,” Semyon called to her.
    

      They set off. And again they went at a walking pace.
    

      “A little while back they were building a school here in their
      Nizhneye Gorodistche,” said Semyon, turning round. “It was a
      wicked thing that was done!”
    

      “Why, what?”
    

      “They say the president put a thousand in his pocket, and the school
      guardian another thousand in his, and the teacher five hundred.”
    

      “The whole school only cost a thousand. It’s wrong to slander
      people, grandfather. That’s all nonsense.”
    

      “I don’t know,... I only tell you what folks say.”
    

      But it was clear that Semyon did not believe the schoolmistress. The
      peasants did not believe her. They always thought she received too large a
      salary, twenty-one roubles a month (five would have been enough), and that
      of the money that she collected from the children for the firewood and the
      watchman the greater part she kept for herself. The guardian thought the
      same as the peasants, and he himself made a profit off the firewood and
      received payments from the peasants for being a guardian—without the
      knowledge of the authorities.
    

      The forest, thank God! was behind them, and now it would be flat, open
      ground all the way to Vyazovye, and there was not far to go now. They had
      to cross the river and then the railway line, and then Vyazovye was in
      sight.
    

      “Where are you driving?” Marya Vassilyevna asked Semyon.
      “Take the road to the right to the bridge.”
    

      “Why, we can go this way as well. It’s not deep enough to
      matter.”
    

      “Mind you don’t drown the horse.”
    

      “What?”
    

      “Look, Hanov is driving to the bridge,” said Marya
      Vassilyevna, seeing the four horses far away to the right. “It is
      he, I think.”
    

      “It is. So he didn’t find Bakvist at home. What a pig-headed
      fellow he is. Lord have mercy upon us! He’s driven over there, and
      what for? It’s fully two miles nearer this way.”
    

      They reached the river. In the summer it was a little stream easily
      crossed by wading. It usually dried up in August, but now, after the
      spring floods, it was a river forty feet in breadth, rapid, muddy, and
      cold; on the bank and right up to the water there were fresh tracks of
      wheels, so it had been crossed here.
    

      “Go on!” shouted Semyon angrily and anxiously, tugging
      violently at the reins and jerking his elbows as a bird does its wings.
      “Go on!”
    

      The horse went on into the water up to his belly and stopped, but at once
      went on again with an effort, and Marya Vassilyevna was aware of a keen
      chilliness in her feet.
    

      “Go on!” she, too, shouted, getting up. “Go on!”
    

      They got out on the bank.
    

      “Nice mess it is, Lord have mercy upon us!” muttered Semyon,
      setting straight the harness. “It’s a perfect plague with this
      Zemstvo....”
    

      Her shoes and goloshes were full of water, the lower part of her dress and
      of her coat and one sleeve were wet and dripping: the sugar and flour had
      got wet, and that was worst of all, and Marya Vassilyevna could only clasp
      her hands in despair and say:
    

      “Oh, Semyon, Semyon! How tiresome you are really!...”
    

      The barrier was down at the railway crossing. A train was coming out of
      the station. Marya Vassilyevna stood at the crossing waiting till it
      should pass, and shivering all over with cold. Vyazovye was in sight now,
      and the school with the green roof, and the church with its crosses
      flashing in the evening sun: and the station windows flashed too, and a
      pink smoke rose from the engine... and it seemed to her that everything
      was trembling with cold.
    

      Here was the train; the windows reflected the gleaming light like the
      crosses on the church: it made her eyes ache to look at them. On the
      little platform between two first-class carriages a lady was standing, and
      Marya Vassilyevna glanced at her as she passed. Her mother! What a
      resemblance! Her mother had had just such luxuriant hair, just such a brow
      and bend of the head. And with amazing distinctness, for the first time in
      those thirteen years, there rose before her mind a vivid picture of her
      mother, her father, her brother, their flat in Moscow, the aquarium with
      little fish, everything to the tiniest detail; she heard the sound of the
      piano, her father’s voice; she felt as she had been then, young,
      good-looking, well-dressed, in a bright warm room among her own people. A
      feeling of joy and happiness suddenly came over her, she pressed her hands
      to her temples in an ecstacy, and called softly, beseechingly:
    

      “Mother!”
    

      And she began crying, she did not know why. Just at that instant Hanov
      drove up with his team of four horses, and seeing him she imagined
      happiness such as she had never had, and smiled and nodded to him as an
      equal and a friend, and it seemed to her that her happiness, her triumph,
      was glowing in the sky and on all sides, in the windows and on the trees.
      Her father and mother had never died, she had never been a schoolmistress,
      it was a long, tedious, strange dream, and now she had awakened....
    

      “Vassilyevna, get in!”
    

      And at once it all vanished. The barrier was slowly raised. Marya
      Vassilyevna, shivering and numb with cold, got into the cart. The carriage
      with the four horses crossed the railway line; Semyon followed it. The
      signalman took off his cap.
    

      “And here is Vyazovye. Here we are.”