THE TEST

 The Bondels were a happy family, and although they frequently quarrelled
      about trifles, they soon became friends again.

 Bondel was a merchant who had retired from active business after saving
      enough to allow him to live quietly; he had rented a little house at
      Saint-Germain and lived there with his wife. He was a quiet man with very
      decided opinions; he had a certain degree of education and read serious
      newspapers; nevertheless, he appreciated the gaulois wit. Endowed with a
      logical mind, and that practical common sense which is the master quality
      of the industrial French bourgeois, he thought little, but clearly, and
      reached a decision only after careful consideration of the matter in hand.
      He was of medium size, with a distinguished look, and was beginning to
      turn gray.

 His wife, who was full of serious qualities, had also several faults. She
      had a quick temper and a frankness that bordered upon violence. She bore a
      grudge a long time. She had once been pretty, but had now become too stout
      and too red; but in her neighborhood at Saint-Germain she still passed for
      a very beautiful woman, who exemplified health and an uncertain temper.

 Their dissensions almost always began at breakfast, over some trivial
      matter, and they often continued all day and even until the following day.
      Their simple, common, limited life imparted seriousness to the most
      unimportant matters, and every topic of conversation became a subject of
      dispute. This had not been so in the days when business occupied their
      minds, drew their hearts together, and gave them common interests and
      occupation.

 But at Saint-Germain they saw fewer people. It had been necessary to make
      new acquaintances, to create for themselves a new world among strangers, a
      new existence devoid of occupations. Then the monotony of loneliness had
      soured each of them a little; and the quiet happiness which they had hoped
      and waited for with the coming of riches did not appear.

 One June morning, just as they were sitting down to breakfast, Bondel
      asked:

 “Do you know the people who live in the little red cottage at the
      end of the Rue du Berceau?”

 Madame Bondel was out of sorts. She answered:

 “Yes and no; I am acquainted with them, but I do not care to know
      them.”

 “Why not? They seem to be very nice.”

 “Because—”

 “This morning I met the husband on the terrace and we took a little
      walk together.”

 Seeing that there was danger in the air, Bendel added: “It was he
      who spoke to me first.”

 His wife looked at him in a displeased manner. She continued: “You
      would have done just as well to avoid him.”

 “Why?”

 “Because there are rumors about them.”

 “What kind?”

 “Oh! rumors such as one often hears!”

 M. Bondel was, unfortunately, a little hasty. He exclaimed:

 “My dear, you know that I abhor gossip. As for those people, I find
      them very pleasant.”

 She asked testily: “The wife also?”

 “Why, yes; although I have barely seen her.”

 The discussion gradually grew more heated, always on the same subject for
      lack of others. Madame Bondel obstinately refused to say what she had
      heard about these neighbors, allowing things to be understood without
      saying exactly what they were. Bendel would shrug his shoulders, grin, and
      exasperate his wife. She finally cried out: “Well! that gentleman is
      deceived by his wife, there!”

 The husband answered quietly: “I can't see how that affects the
      honor of a man.”

 She seemed dumfounded: “What! you don't see?—you don't see?—well,
      that's too much! You don't see!—why, it's a public scandal! he is
      disgraced!”

 He answered: “Ah! by no means! Should a man be considered disgraced
      because he is deceived, because he is betrayed, robbed? No, indeed! I'll
      grant you that that may be the case for the wife, but as for him—”

 She became furious, exclaiming: “For him as well as for her. They
      are both in disgrace; it's a public shame.”

 Bondel, very calm, asked: “First of all, is it true? Who can assert
      such a thing as long as no one has been caught in the act?”

 Madame Bondel was growing uneasy; she snapped: “What? Who can assert
      it? Why, everybody! everybody! it's as clear as the nose on your face.
      Everybody knows it and is talking about it. There is not the slightest
      doubt.”

 He was grinning: “For a long time people thought that the sun
      revolved around the earth. This man loves his wife and speaks of her
      tenderly and reverently. This whole business is nothing but lies!”

 Stamping her foot, she stammered: “Do you think that that fool, that
      idiot, knows anything about it?”

 Bondel did not grow angry; he was reasoning clearly: “Excuse me.
      This gentleman is no fool. He seemed to me, on the contrary, to be very
      intelligent and shrewd; and you can't make me believe that a man with
      brains doesn't notice such a thing in his own house, when the neighbors,
      who are not there, are ignorant of no detail of this liaison—for
      I'll warrant that they know everything.”

 Madame Bondel had a fit of angry mirth, which irritated her husband's
      nerves. She laughed: “Ha! ha! ha! they're all the same! There's not
      a man alive who could discover a thing like that unless his nose was stuck
      into it!”

 The discussion was wandering to other topics now. She was exclaiming over
      the blindness of deceived husbands, a thing which he doubted and which she
      affirmed with such airs of personal contempt that he finally grew angry.
      Then the discussion became an angry quarrel, where she took the side of
      the women and he defended the men. He had the conceit to declare: “Well,
      I swear that if I had ever been deceived, I should have noticed it, and
      immediately, too. And I should have taken away your desire for such things
      in such a manner that it would have taken more than one doctor to set you
      on foot again!”

 Boiling with anger, she cried out to him: “You! you! why, you're as
      big a fool as the others, do you hear!”

 He still maintained: “I can swear to you that I am not!”

 She laughed so impertinently that he felt his heart beat and a chill run
      down his back. For the third time he said:

 “I should have seen it!”

 She rose, still laughing in the same manner. She slammed the door and left
      the room, saying: “Well! if that isn't too much!”

 Bondel remained alone, ill at ease. That insolent, provoking laugh had
      touched him to the quick. He went outside, walked, dreamed. The
      realization of the loneliness of his new life made him sad and morbid. The
      neighbor, whom he had met that morning, came to him with outstretched
      hands. They continued their walk together. After touching on various
      subjects they came to talk of their wives. Both seemed to have something
      to confide, something inexpressible, vague, about these beings associated
      with their lives; their wives. The neighbor was saying:

 “Really, at times, one might think that they bear some particular
      ill-will toward their husband, just because he is a husband. I love my
      wife—I love her very much; I appreciate and respect her; well! there
      are times when she seems to have more confidence and faith in our friends
      than in me.”

 Bondel immediately thought: “There is no doubt; my wife was right!”

 When he left this man he began to think things over again. He felt in his
      soul a strange confusion of contradictory ideas, a sort of interior
      burning; that mocking, impertinent laugh kept ringing in his ears and
      seemed to say: “Why; you are just the same as the others, you fool!”
      That was indeed bravado, one of those pieces of impudence of which a woman
      makes use when she dares everything, risks everything, to wound and
      humiliate the man who has aroused her ire. This poor man must also be one
      of those deceived husbands, like so many others. He had said sadly:
      “There are times when she seems to have more confidence and faith in
      our friends than in me.” That is how a husband formulated his
      observations on the particular attentions of his wife for another man.
      That was all. He had seen nothing more. He was like the rest—all the
      rest!

 And how strangely Bondel's own wife had laughed as she said: “You,
      too —you, too.” How wild and imprudent these creatures are who
      can arouse such suspicions in the heart for the sole purpose of revenge!

 He ran over their whole life since their marriage, reviewed his mental
      list of their acquaintances, to see whether she had ever appeared to show
      more confidence in any one else than in himself. He never had suspected
      any one, he was so calm, so sure of her, so confident.

 But, now he thought of it, she had had a friend, an intimate friend, who
      for almost a year had dined with them three times a week. Tancret, good
      old Tancret, whom he, Bendel, loved as a brother and whom he continued to
      see on the sly, since his wife, he did not know why, had grown angry at
      the charming fellow.

 He stopped to think, looking over the past with anxious eyes. Then he grew
      angry at himself for harboring this shameful insinuation of the defiant,
      jealous, bad ego which lives in all of us. He blamed and accused himself
      when he remembered the visits and the demeanor of this friend whom his
      wife had dismissed for no apparent reason. But, suddenly, other memories
      returned to him, similar ruptures due to the vindictive character of
      Madame Bondel, who never pardoned a slight. Then he laughed frankly at
      himself for the doubts which he had nursed; and he remembered the angry
      looks of his wife as he would tell her, when he returned at night: “I
      saw good old Tancret, and he wished to be remembered to you,” and he
      reassured himself.

 She would invariably answer: “When you see that gentleman you can
      tell him that I can very well dispense with his remembrances.” With
      what an irritated, angry look she would say these words! How well one
      could feel that she did not and would not forgive—and he had
      suspected her even for a second? Such foolishness!

 But why did she grow so angry? She never had given the exact reason for
      this quarrel. She still bore him that grudge! Was it?—But no—no—and
      Bondel declared that he was lowering himself by even thinking of such
      things.

 Yes, he was undoubtedly lowering himself, but he could not help thinking
      of it, and he asked himself with terror if this thought which had entered
      into his mind had not come to stop, if he did not carry in his heart the
      seed of fearful torment. He knew himself; he was a man to think over his
      doubts, as formerly he would ruminate over his commercial operations, for
      days and nights, endlessly weighing the pros and the cons.

 He was already becoming excited; he was walking fast and losing his
      calmness. A thought cannot be downed. It is intangible, cannot be caught,
      cannot be killed.

 Suddenly a plan occurred to him; it was bold, so bold that at first he
      doubted whether he would carry it out.

 Each time that he met Tancret, his friend would ask for news of Madame
      Bondel, and Bondel would answer: “She is still a little angry.”
      Nothing more. Good Lord! What a fool he had been! Perhaps!

 Well, he would take the train to Paris, go to Tancret, and bring him back
      with him that very evening, assuring him that his wife's mysterious anger
      had disappeared. But how would Madame Bondel act? What a scene there would
      be! What anger! what scandal! What of it?—that would be revenge!
      When she should come face to face with him, unexpectedly, he certainly
      ought to be able to read the truth in their expressions.

 He immediately went to the station, bought his ticket, got into the car,
      and as soon as he felt him self being carried away by the train, he felt a
      fear, a kind of dizziness, at what he was going to do. In order not to
      weaken, back down, and return alone, he tried not to think of the matter
      any longer, to bring his mind to bear on other affairs, to do what he had
      decided to do with a blind resolution; and he began to hum tunes from
      operettas and music halls until he reached Paris.

 As soon as he found himself walking along the streets that led to
      Tancret's, he felt like stopping, He paused in front of several shops,
      noticed the prices of certain objects, was interested in new things, felt
      like taking a glass of beer, which was not his usual custom; and as he
      approached his friend's dwelling he ardently hoped not meet him. But
      Tancret was at home, alone, reading. He jumped up in surprise, crying:
      “Ah! Bondel! what luck!”

 Bondel, embarrassed, answered: “Yes, my dear fellow, I happened to
      be in Paris, and I thought I'd drop in and shake hands with you.”

 “That's very nice, very nice! The more so that for some time you
      have not favored me with your presence very often.”

 “Well, you see—even against one's will, one is often
      influenced by surrounding conditions, and as my wife seemed to bear you
      some ill-will”

 “Jove! 'seemed'—she did better than that, since she showed me
      the door.”

 “What was the reason? I never heard it.”

 “Oh! nothing at all—a bit of foolishness—a discussion in
      which we did not both agree.”

 “But what was the subject of this discussion?”

 “A lady of my acquaintance, whom you may perhaps know by name,
      Madame Boutin.”

 “Ah! really. Well, I think that my wife has forgotten her grudge,
      for this very morning she spoke to me of you in very pleasant terms.”

 Tancret started and seemed so dumfounded that for a few minutes he could
      find nothing to say. Then he asked: “She spoke of me—in
      pleasant terms?”

 “Yes.”

 “You are sure?”

 “Of course I am. I am not dreaming.”

 “And then?”

 “And then—as I was coming to Paris I thought that I would
      please you by coming to tell you the good news.”

 “Why, yes—why, yes—”

 Bondel appeared to hesitate; then, after a short pause, he added: “I
      even had an idea.”

 “What is it?”

 “To take you back home with me to dinner.”

 Tancret, who was naturally prudent, seemed a little worried by this
      proposition, and he asked: “Oh! really—is it possible? Are we
      not exposing ourselves to—to—a scene?”

 “No, no, indeed!”

 “Because, you know, Madame Bendel bears malice for a long time.”

 “Yes, but I can assure you that she no longer bears you any ill—will.
      I am even convinced that it will be a great pleasure for her to see you
      thus, unexpectedly.”

 “Really?”

 “Yes, really!”

 “Well, then! let us go along. I am delighted. You see, this
      misunderstanding was very unpleasant for me.”

 They set out together toward the Saint-Lazare station, arm in arm. They
      made the trip in silence. Both seemed absorbed in deep meditation. Seated
      in the car, one opposite the other, they looked at each other without
      speaking, each observing that the other was pale.

 Then they left the train and once more linked arms as if to unite against
      some common danger. After a walk of a few minutes they stopped, a little
      out of breath, before Bondel's house. Bondel ushered his friend into the
      parlor, called the servant, and asked: “Is madame at home?”

 “Yes, monsieur.”

 “Please ask her to come down at once.”

 They dropped into two armchairs and waited. Both were filled with the same
      longing to escape before the appearance of the much-feared person.

 A well-known, heavy tread could be heard descending the stairs. A hand
      moved the knob, and both men watched the brass handle turn. Then the door
      opened wide, and Madame Bondel stopped and looked to see who was there
      before she entered. She looked, blushed, trembled, retreated a step, then
      stood motionless, her cheeks aflame and her hands resting against the
      sides of the door frame.

 Tancret, as pale as if about to faint, had arisen, letting fall his hat,
      which rolled along the floor. He stammered out: “Mon Dieu—madame—it
      is I—I thought—I ventured—I was so sorry—”

 As she did not answer, he continued: “Will you forgive me?”

 Then, quickly, carried away by some impulse, she walked toward him with
      her hands outstretched; and when he had taken, pressed, and held these two
      hands, she said, in a trembling, weak little voice, which was new to her
      husband:

 “Ah! my dear friend—how happy I am!”

 And Bondel, who was watching them, felt an icy chill run over him, as if
      he had been dipped in a cold bath.