THEODULE SABOT'S CONFESSION

 When Sabot entered the inn at Martinville it was a signal for laughter.
      What a rogue he was, this Sabot! There was a man who did not like priests,
      for instance! Oh, no, oh, no! He did not spare them, the scamp.

 Sabot (Theodule), a master carpenter, represented liberal thought in
      Martinville. He was a tall, thin man, with gray, cunning eyes, and thin
      lips, and wore his hair plastered down on his temples. When he said:
      “Our holy father, the pope” in a certain manner, everyone
      laughed. He made a point of working on Sunday during the hour of mass. He
      killed his pig each year on Monday in Holy Week in order to have enough
      black pudding to last till Easter, and when the priest passed by, he
      always said by way of a joke: “There goes one who has just swallowed
      his God off a salver.”

 The priest, a stout man and also very tall, dreaded him on account of his
      boastful talk which attracted followers. The Abbe Maritime was a politic
      man, and believed in being diplomatic. There had been a rivalry between
      them for ten years, a secret, intense, incessant rivalry. Sabot was
      municipal councillor, and they thought he would become mayor, which would
      inevitably mean the final overthrow of the church.

 The elections were about to take place. The church party was shaking in
      its shoes in Martinville.

 One morning the cure set out for Rouen, telling his servant that he was
      going to see the archbishop. He returned in two days with a joyous,
      triumphant air. And everyone knew the following day that the chancel of
      the church was going to be renovated. A sum of six hundred francs had been
      contributed by the archbishop out of his private fund. All the old pine
      pews were to be removed, and replaced by new pews made of oak. It would be
      a big carpentering job, and they talked about it that very evening in all
      the houses in the village.

 Theodule Sabot was not laughing.

 When he went through the village the following morning, the neighbors,
      friends and enemies, all asked him, jokingly:

 “Are you going to do the work on the chancel of the church?”

 He could find nothing to say, but he was furious, he was good and angry.

 Ill-natured people added:

 “It is a good piece of work; and will bring in not less than two or
      three per cent. profit.”

 Two days later, they heard that the work of renovation had been entrusted
      to Celestin Chambrelan, the carpenter from Percheville. Then this was
      denied, and it was said that all the pews in the church were going to be
      changed. That would be well worth the two thousand francs that had been
      demanded of the church administration.

 Theodule Sabot could not sleep for thinking about it. Never, in all the
      memory of man, had a country carpenter undertaken a similar piece of work.
      Then a rumor spread abroad that the cure felt very grieved that he had to
      give this work to a carpenter who was a stranger in the community, but
      that Sabot's opinions were a barrier to his being entrusted with the job.

 Sabot knew it well. He called at the parsonage just as it was growing
      dark. The servant told him that the cure was at church. He went to the
      church.

 Two attendants on the altar of the Virgin, two sour old maids, were
      decorating the altar for the month of Mary, under the direction of the
      priest, who stood in the middle of the chancel with his portly paunch,
      directing the two women who, mounted on chairs, were placing flowers
      around the tabernacle.

 Sabot felt ill at ease in there, as though he were in the house of his
      greatest enemy, but the greed of gain was gnawing at his heart. He drew
      nearer, holding his cap in his hand, and not paying any attention to the
      “demoiselles de la Vierge,” who remained standing startled,
      astonished, motionless on their chairs.

 He faltered:

 “Good morning, monsieur le cure.”

 The priest replied without looking at him, all occupied as he was with the
      altar:

 “Good morning, Mr. Carpenter.”

 Sabot, nonplussed, knew not what to say next. But after a pause he
      remarked:

 “You are making preparations?”

 Abbe Maritime replied:

 “Yes, we are near the month of Mary.”

 “Why, why,” remarked Sabot and then was silent. He would have
      liked to retire now without saying anything, but a glance at the chancel
      held him back. He saw sixteen seats that had to be remade, six to the
      right and eight to the left, the door of the sacristy occupying the place
      of two. Sixteen oak seats, that would be worth at most three hundred
      francs, and by figuring carefully one might certainly make two hundred
      francs on the work if one were not clumsy.

 Then he stammered out:

 “I have come about the work.”

 The cure appeared surprised. He asked:

 “What work?”

 “The work to be done,” murmured Sabot, in dismay.

 Then the priest turned round and looking him straight in the eyes, said:

 “Do you mean the repairs in the chancel of my church?”

 At the tone of the abbe, Theodule Sabot felt a chill run down his back and
      he once more had a longing to take to his heels. However, he replied
      humbly:

 “Why, yes, monsieur le cure.”

 Then the abbe folded his arms across his large stomach and, as if filled
      with amazement, said:

 “Is it you—you—you, Sabot—who have come to ask me
      for this . . . You—the only irreligious man in my parish! Why, it
      would be a scandal, a public scandal! The archbishop would give me a
      reprimand, perhaps transfer me.”

 He stopped a few seconds, for breath, and then resumed in a calmer tone:
      “I can understand that it pains you to see a work of such importance
      entrusted to a carpenter from a neighboring parish. But I cannot do
      otherwise, unless—but no—it is impossible—you would not
      consent, and unless you did, never.”

 Sabot now looked at the row of benches in line as far as the entrance
      door. Christopher, if they were going to change all those!

 And he asked:

 “What would you require of me? Tell me.”

 The priest, in a firm tone replied:

 “I must have an extraordinary token of your good intentions.”

 “I do not say—I do not say; perhaps we might come to an
      understanding,” faltered Sabot.

 “You will have to take communion publicly at high mass next Sunday,”
      declared the cure.

 The carpenter felt he was growing pale, and without replying, he asked:

 “And the benches, are they going to be renovated?”

 The abbe replied with confidence:

 “Yes, but later on.”

 Sabot resumed:

 “I do not say, I do not say. I am not calling it off, I am
      consenting to religion, for sure. But what rubs me the wrong way is,
      putting it in practice; but in this case I will not be refractory.”

 The attendants of the Virgin, having got off their chairs had concealed
      themselves behind the altar; and they listened pale with emotion.

 The cure, seeing he had gained the victory, became all at once very
      friendly, quite familiar.

 “That is good, that is good. That was wisely said, and not stupid,
      you understand. You will see, you will see.”

 Sabot smiled and asked with an awkward air:

 “Would it not be possible to put off this communion just a trifle?”

 But the priest replied, resuming his severe expression:

 “From the moment that the work is put into your hands, I want to be
      assured of your conversion.”

 Then he continued more gently:

 “You will come to confession to-morrow; for I must examine you at
      least twice.”

 “Twice?” repeated Sabot.

 “Yes.”

 The priest smiled.

 “You understand perfectly that you must have a general cleaning up,
      a thorough cleansing. So I will expect you to-morrow.”

 The carpenter, much agitated, asked:

 “Where do you do that?”

 “Why—in the confessional.”

 “In—that box, over there in the corner? The fact is—is—that
      it does not suit me, your box.”

 “How is that?”

 “Seeing that—seeing that I am not accustomed to that, and also
      I am rather hard of hearing.”

 The cure was very affable and said:

 “Well, then! you shall come to my house and into my parlor. We will
      have it just the two of us, tete-a-tete. Does that suit you?”

 “Yes, that is all right, that will suit me, but your box, no.”

 “Well, then, to-morrow after the days work, at six o'clock.”

 “That is understood, that is all right, that is agreed on.
      To-morrow, monsieur le cure. Whoever draws back is a skunk!”

 And he held out his great rough hand which the priest grasped heartily
      with a clap that resounded through the church.

 Theodule Sabot was not easy in his mind all the following day. He had a
      feeling analogous to the apprehension one experiences when a tooth has to
      be drawn. The thought recurred to him at every moment: “I must go to
      confession this evening.” And his troubled mind, the mind of an
      atheist only half convinced, was bewildered with a confused and
      overwhelming dread of the divine mystery.

 As soon as he had finished his work, he betook himself to the parsonage.
      The cure was waiting for him in the garden, reading his breviary as he
      walked along a little path. He appeared radiant and greeted him with a
      good-natured laugh.

 “Well, here we are! Come in, come in, Monsieur Sabot, no one will
      eat you.”

 And Sabot preceded him into the house. He faltered:

 “If you do not mind I should like to get through with this little
      matter at once.”

 The cure replied:

 “I am at your service. I have my surplice here. One minute and I
      will listen to you.”

 The carpenter, so disturbed that he had not two ideas in his head, watched
      him as he put on the white vestment with its pleated folds. The priest
      beckoned to him and said:

 “Kneel down on this cushion.”

 Sabot remained standing, ashamed of having to kneel. He stuttered:

 “Is it necessary?”

 But the abbe had become dignified.

 “You cannot approach the penitent bench except on your knees.”

 And Sabot knelt down.

 “Repeat the confiteor,” said the priest.

 “What is that?” asked Sabot.

 “The confiteor. If you do not remember it, repeat after me, one by
      one, the words I am going to say.” And the cure repeated the sacred
      prayer, in a slow tone, emphasizing the words which the carpenter repeated
      after him. Then he said:

 “Now make your confession.”

 But Sabot was silent, not knowing where to begin. The abbe then came to
      his aid.

 “My child, I will ask you questions, since you don't seem familiar
      with these things. We will take, one by one, the commandments of God.
      Listen to me and do not be disturbed. Speak very frankly and never fear
      that you may say too much.

 “'One God alone, thou shalt adore,
   And love him perfectly.'

 “Have you ever loved anything, or anybody, as well as you loved God?
      Have you loved him with all your soul, all your heart, all the strength of
      your love?”

 Sabot was perspiring with the effort of thinking. He replied:

 “No. Oh, no, m'sieu le cure. I love God as much as I can. That is
      —yes—I love him very much. To say that I do not love my
      children, no—I cannot say that. To say that if I had to choose
      between them and God, I could not be sure. To say that if I had to lose a
      hundred francs for the love of God, I could not say about that. But I love
      him well, for sure, I love him all the same.” The priest said
      gravely “You must love Him more than all besides.” And Sabot,
      meaning well, declared “I will do what I possibly can, m'sieu le
      cure.” The abbe resumed:

 “'God's name in vain thou shalt not take
   Nor swear by any other thing.'

 “Did you ever swear?”

 “No-oh, that, no! I never swear, never. Sometimes, in a moment of
      anger, I may say sacre nom de Dieu! But then, I never swear.”

 “That is swearing,” cried the priest, and added seriously:

 “Do not do it again.

 “'Thy Sundays thou shalt keep
   In serving God devoutly.'

 “What do you do on Sunday?”

 This time Sabot scratched his ear.

 “Why, I serve God as best I can, m'sieu le cure. I serve him—at
      home. I work on Sunday.”

 The cure interrupted him, saying magnanimously:

 “I know, you will do better in future. I will pass over the
      following commandments, certain that you have not transgressed the two
      first. We will take from the sixth to the ninth. I will resume:

 “'Others' goods thou shalt not take
   Nor keep what is not thine.'

 “Have you ever taken in any way what belonged to another?”

 But Theodule Sabot became indignant.

 “Of course not, of course not! I am an honest man, m'sieu le cure, I
      swear it, for sure. To say that I have not sometimes charged for a few
      more hours of work to customers who had means, I could not say that. To
      say that I never add a few centimes to bills, only a few, I would not say
      that. But to steal, no! Oh, not that, no!”

 The priest resumed severely:

 “To take one single centime constitutes a theft. Do not do it again.

 'False witness thou shalt not bear,
   Nor lie in any way.'

 “Have you ever told a lie?”

 “No, as to that, no. I am not a liar. That is my quality. To say
      that I have never told a big story, I would not like to say that. To say
      that I have never made people believe things that were not true when it
      was to my own interest, I would not like to say that. But as for lying, I
      am not a liar.”

 The priest simply said:

 “Watch yourself more closely.” Then he continued:

 “'The works of the flesh thou shalt not desire
   Except in marriage only.'

 “Did you ever desire, or live with, any other woman than your wife?”

 Sabot exclaimed with sincerity:

 “As to that, no; oh, as to that, no, m'sieu le Cure. My poor wife,
      deceive her! No, no! Not so much as the tip of a finger, either in thought
      or in act. That is the truth.”

 They were silent a few seconds, then, in a lower tone, as though a doubt
      had arisen in his mind, he resumed:

 “When I go to town, to say that I never go into a house, you know,
      one of the licensed houses, just to laugh and talk and see something
      different, I could not say that. But I always pay, monsieur le cure, I
      always pay. From the moment you pay, without anyone seeing or knowing you,
      no one can get you into trouble.”

 The cure did not insist, and gave him absolution.

 Theodule Sabot did the work on the chancel, and goes to communion every
      month.