Whittingham Street, N

., had benefited by the war. The long vista of its
windows flush with the pavement was decent with curtains of a cleanness
unwonted before the cataclysm. There were strange dots of reflected
sunlight from brass door-handles and knockers that were polished. These
things were symbols of the newly realised importance of Whittingham
Street's inhabitants in the scheme of society, an importance which,
swiftly translated into self-esteem, expressed itself with a uniformity
natural to life in a mean street. That house was poor indeed which did
not possess its gramophone. The womenfolk were curiously predominant to
those who remembered the old-time loungers at the corner "pubs," and
that womenfolk, disdainful of the feathers of the long ago, was arrayed
in startlingly smart, well-emphasized, cheap copies of the latest
fashions, oddly incongruous with the tall, smoke-vomiting chimneys of
Messrs. Hathaway's great factory which closed the vista of the street.
The sparseness of the men, immediately remarked, received a solemn
significance from the flag-hung shrine on the wall of the Council
School. The children who played in front of it—paper helmet, tin-can
drum and wooden sword—were vividly cognizant that this was a time of
War.

  It was evening, and from the great gates of Messrs. Hathaway's factory
poured a ceaseless stream of women. But not this evening did that
stream flow down the street with its usual swift and uninterrupted
course. There were checks in it—obstacles of groups that talked
excitedly and forgot to progress—while others in eager haste eddied
round them. On the high wall by the gate, a bill-poster was covering a
"War Savings" placard with another of different meaning. A black cloud
of smoke drifted away from the tall chimneys and was not reinforced
other than by faint and lessening wisps.

 A young woman, one of those whose urgent haste trifled not with
talk, hurried down the street, stopped before one of the neatest
house-fronts, tremblingly thrust a key into the latch, opened and ran
breathlessly upstairs.

 A grey-haired old woman rose from a wooden chair by the side of a
cradle in a clean and modestly furnished room. At the entrance of her
daughter-in-law she laid a finger on her lips and looked warningly to
the infant. Then remarking an obvious distress, she changed colour.

 "What's the matter, Ann?" she whispered, shaking with a sudden alarm.
She had to steady herself by the support of the table. "Not—Jim?"

 The young woman shook her head, controlled her panting breath.

 "Hathaway's!" she brought out. "Closing down!"

 The elder stared speechlessly for a moment, then seated herself with
that blank mute resignation of the aged poor, long disillusioned of
any title to good fortune. The fingers of her unshapely hands twined
and untwined themselves tensely in her lap.

 "Don't you hear, mother?" said the young woman irritably. "Hathaway's
are closing down!"

 "Oh, dear!" the old woman raised a face that was strained with imminent
tears. "I knew it 'ud never last—I knew it 'ud never last!"

 "What we shall do, 'Eaven knows!" said Ann, viciously accenting the
sole possible fount of knowledge. "They're all closing down—all of
'em, all round!" Her gesture, as she unpinned her hat and put it, with
an excess of energy, on the table, testified to the completeness of
the closed horizon. She stood looking at the sleeping child, her brows
bent, her mouth troubled. Then suddenly she flung herself on her knees
and buried her head in the old woman's lap, shaking with sobs.

 "Oh, I did so want to keep it nice for Jim when 'e comes back! I did! I
did! All we've got together. And now it'll all go—bit by bit! And I've
worked so 'ard—so very 'ard! An' 'e'll never see, never know 'ow nice
it was! Oh—mother!" She could utter no more words, only inarticulate
sounds.

 The old woman soothed her, stroking her hair.

 "There, dear! there, dear! Don't take on! It'll all come right. I can
go out again an' do a bit of cleanin'. I daresay Mrs. Smith'll take me
on again. I ain't done no work for a long while—sitting 'ere eatin'
your bread—I've 'ad a nice rest, I 'ave—I'm quite strong again now.
We'll both get somethin', you see, dear!"

  The young woman raised herself.

 "No!—No!—No!—You shan't work any more!" She turned her head wearily.
"I can't make it out. What's happening? Why are they all shutting
down like this?"

 The old woman looked at her stupidly. The remote causes which made or
unmade her unimportant existence were beyond her comprehension.

 "What's that?" cried Ann, jumping to her feet. " What's 'e calling? "

 The raucous shout of a newsvendor floated up from the street. Ann
listened for a moment—and then, after a hurried search for a halfpenny
in her purse, dashed out of the door and down the stairs.

 She reappeared after a bare minute, brandishing the newspaper,
wild-eyed, panting.

 "Mother! Mother!" She could not wait to enter the door before
commencing her news. "It's Peace! Peace! " She struggled with the
unfolded paper, crushed it together again, searching eagerly for the
magic headlines. "Here it is! Listen!" The old woman, equally all
trembling eagerness, was standing at her side, pawing vaguely at the
arm which held the newspaper. Ann read out the great news. "' The wild
rumours current during the past few days have received a startling
confirmation. It is announced that an armistice has been signed on all
the fronts. This undoubtedly means a general Peace. The end of the
war has come. ' Mother! it's all over! it's all over—and Jim'll be
coming back! Oh, I can't 'ardly believe it! It's all over! Oh, thank
God—thank God!"

  "All over! My Jim! Safe and sound! Oh," the old woman commenced that
sniffling weep common to the aged and the young. "I can't 'elp it,
Ann—I can't 'elp it!—I must cry!"

 Ann dashed down the newspaper and flung her arms round the old woman
in a close embrace. "Mother! Mother! I never was so"—and here a sob
checked her speech also—"so 'appy in my life!" Face against face,
the tears of the two women mingled—tears not of grief but of emotion
for which there was no expression. Somewhere down the street church
bells were ringing in joyous peal on peal. It might have been merely a
coincidence of practice, but to the two women whose simple souls beat
close together, in a swoon of intense feeling that obliterated the
sharp outlines of environment, this happy rioting of the bells seemed a
holy blessing on the moment.

 "Oh, Ann dear, Ann dear," said the old woman, looking up. "What a
thanksgiving it'll be for all the poor anxious women!"

 "Oh, we're very lucky—we're very lucky. Jim'll be coming back. Think
of it, mother!"

 They kissed one another as if each were kissing the man who would come
back as son and husband.

 "We've got to keep it for 'im," said Ann. "All the little 'ome. An'
'e'll soon be back to work for us an' the baby, an' we shan't never be
parted any more! Oh, mother, think of the poor women who won't 'ave
no one to come back to 'em! When they see 'em marching by! Oh—we're
lucky, we're very lucky!"

 The old woman stood staring out of the window in vague thought, her
eye caught by the vivid red of the flags on the War Shrine.

 "It'll be a different world, Ann, when they all come back," she said.
"Them what 'ave been left be'ind all through will find lots missing
what they look for. And them what come back won't come back the same.
It'll never be the same again, any of it; let's 'ope it'll be better."

  They were coming back. The Mother-City of the Empire woke, silent of
traffic, decked for a day that knew no sufficient parallel, the day
when the thousands of her sons—those who had gone in their ones and
twos, their single battalions—should march back from vast adventure in
the full majesty of their corporate soldier-life. The London Divisions
were coming back from the War, were marching for the last time at full
strength. And the London streets were tunnels of gay flags, walled with
black masses of citizens kept clear from the sanded roadways. From
every steeple the bells tossed out their exuberant rejoicing. In every
breast of the millions there congregated was a surge of emotion that
exhaled in one sustained murmur of the gladness for which there are no
words but which fills the eyes and chokes the throat.

 They were coming! The thrilling blare of instruments of brass; the
heart-stirring tap and roll and beat of the drums; the intoxicating
rhythmic swinging lilt and crash; the brave gay runs of melody,
sublimely simple, that bring the tears; the solid, even tramp of
thousands who march as one—and the leading files were passing in a
storm of cheers, a madness of waving hands. For the last time they
passed shoulder to shoulder in the familiar ranks, marching as they
had marched for all the years of exile, marching as they had marched
down the fatal roads to Loos and Gommecourt, Guillemont and all those
rubble heaps where the bravest and the dearest of the greatest city of
the world died for the fragment of a village and for England. Rifles
at the slope, bare bayonets asserting the ancient privileges that they
had won, O so dearly, the right to flaunt, the heavy weather-stained
pack on the sturdy shoulders, the steel helmets awry with the tilt
of long-familiar use, the brown strong faces gleaming with their
smiles—so they marched, not any more under the thunder of the guns,
but in a frenzy of voices where the madly rioting bells were lost.

 Battalion by battalion—all the glorious names, London's own—the
London Scottish, first in the fray in the long ago, the Queen's
Westminsters, the Kensingtons, the London Rifle Brigade, the H.A.C.,
the numberless battalions of the London Regiment—they came, each
with its aura of the deathless dead. They came from the interminable
purgatory of the endless trenches, terminated at last, from the
unimaginable inferno of Hill 60, from the hopeless dying of May the
Ninth, from the fierce hopes, the bitter strife of Loos, from the
massacre of Gommecourt and the bloody fights of Guillemont, of Vimy
Ridge, of Messines, of a thousand places that were humble and are
henceforth names of splendour. Miraculously strong, happy, pregnant
with vivid life they emerged from that distant whelm of peril. And
the eyes that had looked so long at death in the bare fields pocked
hideously with the disease of war, looked up now at the ranked tall
buildings, so familiar and yet so strange, so impressively permanent
after timeless ons of destruction. Behind those windows—could it
be?—they had sat at desk through months and years. Between them and
that past was a curtain of fire, of emotions that had transformed, of
the intensity of life which has persisted in the face of death. And
rank by rank, battalion after battalion, swinging with powerful stride,
they marched back into the past that had seemed for ever gone.

 And those who watched the level ranks flowing in their endless stream,
cheering with throats now incapable of aught but the inarticulate cry,
perceiving them mistily through a blur of tears, saw more than the men
who marched, treading once again the asphalt of the London streets.
They saw the ghosts of ranks, doubling—more than doubling—the ranks
of living men, the ghosts of those who had looked as these looked,
brown-faced, strong-limbed, the incarnation of living will, and were
now no more than the wind blowing over the desolate countrysides where
they had ceased to be. Yet were they present, the men who had died
that England might live. The stir of their souls was in the skirling
pipes, the wail and feverish beat of the fifes and drums, the maddening
purposeful blare and thud of the brass bands. They looked out of the
eyes of those who marched—the soul unconquerable, the living spirit
of the English race. And a divine afflatus swept over the waving,
cheering crowds, swept them to a wilder intoxication. One, whose
faculty of speech was not yet overwhelmed, cried: "Three cheers for the
boys who are left behind! Hurrah! Hurrah!—--" and could not finish.
And a woman who stood, tensely pallid, staring at the so-familiar
badges of the troops who passed, stared at utter strangeness, and fell
as dead.

 The next battalion followed on, singing, carrying on a tune caught up
far back along the route, the farewell song of Kitchener's Army of
1915, sung now as an instinctive antistrophe to that old chorale when
they had marched to war:

  "Keep the home fires burning,



 While your hearts are yearning,



 Though your lads are far away, they dream of home,



 There's a silver lining



 Through the dark cloud shining,



 Turn your dark clouds inside out



 Till the boys come home."





 They passed in a roar of voices that drowned the band.

 So the long, long columns of the London Divisions tramped through the
heart of the Mother-City, under the fluttering of countless flags,
under the surge and resurge of joy-bells from every steeple, under
great banners that proclaimed the gratitude of the city. Rank after
rank they lifted their eyes to the laurel-green inscription that
spanned the street at Temple Bar: " Shall We Forget?—Never!

"

 Rank by rank they passed under the promise—the thousands of men welded
in the fires of war to a wondrous miracle of collective soul—passed
onward for the last time as one living unit, ere they should lay down
their arms, fall out —and disperse, individuals that were fragments
of a sacred memory, the shreds of a battle-flag distributed.

  Sir Thomas Jackson Hathaway, Kt., Alderman of the City of London,
looked along the masculine faces, spaced with the interstices of the
departed ladies, of the little dinner-party of intimate friends, and
then again to the brown keen visage of his son. He pushed along the
decanter—he was old-fashioned and made a virtue of it—"Fill up,
Harry, my boy—I've been looking after the cellar while you've been
away—there's more of it." He laughed a little at the mirth of his
implied suggestion that there might possibly be a shortage in the
cellars of Sir Thomas Hathaway. And his guests laughed a little in
courtesy.

 "We've kept the flag flying here also, my boy," said the big, heavily
jovial host, puffing hugely at his cigar and then taking it from his
mouth to examine it with a superfluously critical eye. "You'll find
things as well—better, than when you left. You don't mind, gentlemen,
this little talk of shop? After all, we're all friends together, and
most of us have some small interest in the little business, ha! ha!"
The guests were, in fact, Sir Thomas Hathaway's co-directors in the
large enterprises he controlled. He continued: "Better I may say, for
we have been very conservative—we've looked to the younger generation
away fighting our battles for us —and we've built up a reserve fund
that a few years ago we shouldn't have dreamed of. You've come back
to a first-class concern, Harry, my boy. Here's to it!" He raised and
drained his glass, setting a followed example to his guests.

 Captain Hathaway had been toying with a match on the tablecloth. He
looked up—quiet and thoughtful, his face clean-cut and aristocratic by
contrast with the heavy opulence of his sire.

 "You don't anticipate Labour trouble, then, father?"

 Sir Thomas Hathaway laughed, a guffaw, and crashed his hand on the
table.

 "Labour troubles, my boy! You need have no fear on that score. We're
going to teach Labour a lesson. We haven't built up our reserve for
nothing.—not only ourselves, but all the houses in the trade. For long
enough we've been dictated to by Labour—and now, by God, we're going
to crush it! Do you know what's coming, my boy? Have you thought about
it? There's going to be the biggest flood of Labour chucked on the
market that the world has ever known. All of 'em fightin'— fightin' for jobs! And the trade, Harry, my boy, is going to lock out ! We're
closed down now, and we shan't open again till our own good time. How
long d'you think the Union funds'll last? We'll bust 'em —bust 'em
for ever and a day. And when we open our shops again to Labour—it'll
be on our own terms! Here, fill up, gentlemen, I can vouch for this
wine—cost me a sinful price it did. We'll bust 'em, my lad, so that
never again in our time shall we hear a word of Labour trouble." He
gulped the glassful of his sinfully costly wine.

 Captain Hathaway glanced round the table at the somewhat flushed,
semi-senile features of his father's guests and partners. They were one
and all nodding their heads in varying emphasis of approbation. He got
up.

 "Well, father, I don't think we'll discuss it now. Suppose we join the
ladies?"

 In the high drawing-room, softly lit with diffused radiance from the
ceiling, draped with precious modern hangings that were genuine and
spaced out with expensive antique paintings that were not, furnished
with the luxury of a wealth too utterly complete in its overwhelming
newness to allow imagination its leap across an artistic restraint,
the ladies purred, or cooed in careful falsetto, as they awaited the
entrance of the males. At a grand piano, slightly removed, a young
woman with a delicately refined face played softly to herself—in
a quiet ecstasy of gladness for which this was the only satisfying
expression.

 Captain Hathaway, entering with his father's guests, came straight
across to her, and she looked up, smiling, into her husband's face
as though he had come in response to a murmured summoning spell. She
ceased and leaned back her head against him as he stood close behind
her.

 "Oh, Harry," she said, "it's so lovely to have you again—for always,
always!" Her eyes half closed and her bosom heaved as she drank in an
intoxicating realization of his definite return, sketched to herself a
delicious little swoon.

  "My dear!" he murmured. "It's good! Home—home for always with my
beloved!"

 She clutched at his hand, and for a moment, while the loud-voiced
crowd vanished, they were secret lovers, snatched up to dizzy heights,
intensely thrilling with an exquisite community, eyes looking into
eyes and seeing more than human brain can translate of transcendent
vision. She released him and bowed forward suddenly with a little gulp,
striking, with trembling hands, vague chords on the piano.

 "Now, Ethel, my dear," came the crass boom of her father-in-law's
voice, "when you've finished your spooning, let's have something jolly.
What about that bit out of 'Not a Word to the Wife!' Tra-la-la-la-la!"
He sketched a hideous caricature of blatant banality. "We're all jolly
to-night—none of your mooning sentiment, but jolly. Eh, ladies and
gentlemen?—properly jolly for Harry's first night back."

 Ethel got up from the piano, coupling an allegation of another's
superior capacity with an invitation to perform, an invitation
smirkingly accepted.

 The slangy crash and bang alternating with hyper-emphasized
sentimentality of the current tune was a cover under which Ethel
Hathaway retreated to happy intimacy with her husband. Not for long was
she allowed it. The very-consciously best-looking of the co-directors'
wives sidled up and subsided into the adjacent chair. She yearned
up into Captain Hathaway's face, while she cooed deprecation of her
intrusion to his wife.

 "But I do so want to hear how Captain Hathaway earned his Military
Cross! Of course, I read all about it in the papers—but then—they're
so bald, aren't they? One misses, what shall I say?—the human touch of
heroism."

 Mrs. Hathaway caught her husband's eye and forbade the instant flight.

 "Tell Mrs. Jameson all about it, Harry," she commanded coolly. There
was something in the tone which rendered Mrs. Jameson's extorted
confidence quite worthless.

 "There's little to tell," said Captain Hathaway. "The fellow who
really earned anything there was to get—and, I'm glad to say, got the
D.C.M.—was one of my men, a chap named Jim Swain. He used to be in our
employment, Ethel, by the way. It was a pretty tight corner and I got
practically left alone—all the other fellows knocked out—and this
chap Swain came up with a bag of bombs—jolly plucky thing, for there
didn't seem a dog's chance—and we chucked the bombs at the Hun till he
didn't dare raise his head. After a bit, some of another company came
up and we consolidated that bit of trench. That's all there was to it."

 "Oh, how splendid!" Mrs. Jameson enthused vaguely. "Leadership is everything, isn't it?"

 "When you've got something to lead, Mrs. Jameson. One couldn't have
better stuff than my men—they're magnificent. They're the nation—and
now they're coming back they've got to be treated like the men they
are and not like soulless machinery." He wound up on a note of fierce
protest against something not obvious to his hearers.

  "Now, Harry," said his wife, "don't inflict your theories on Mrs.
Jameson. We both of us positively refuse to be sympathetic with the
working class, don't we, Mrs. Jameson?" She laughed lightly. "The
working class is just as selfish as any other."

 A wave of collective chatter from an approaching group engulfed this
conversation.

 Late that night Sir Thomas Hathaway sat alone with his son.

 "Now, Harry, my lad," he said. "You're going to take Ethel away for a
three months' holiday. You've jolly well earned it, both of you. And,
when you come back, you'll be head of Hathaway and Company. I've done
my bit and I'm going to rest. My interest in the business is now being
transferred into your name. That's my little present to you, my boy, by
way of showing that I'm proud of you. And I know that you'll keep up
the fine old traditions of the house, eh?"

  The curtains had disappeared from the windows of Whittingham Street.
The brass of the doors had lost its polish. The women who had tripped
along in an earnest display of finery were replaced by blowsy unkempt
females who stood at the doors and gossiped. Once more the corners
emphasized by the sordid public-houses were the idling-ground of groups
of men, more numerous, shabbier even than of old. But these men had
not the shiftless look of their predecessors. In their faces, thin
and white, was a hardness which was odd in an urban population. In
the eyes which followed the progress of a stranger up the street was
a dangerous glare. The flags of the War Shrine had disappeared; its
gilt-inscribed panel was dingy and splashed with mud. At the far end of
the street the great chimneys of Hathaway's works stuck up, clean of
smoke, into a clear sky. The massive entrance gates were a closed wall
across the vista.

 In the little room to which Jim Swain had returned—after the days
unnumbered of life in the open trenches, wet dykes in the winter, and
in summer dusty sunken avenues where death struck suddenly in the
glare; after the countless nights of clear stars rising to a wondrous
infinity of multitude and distance above the dark bank of parapet—Ann
bent over a soap-box cradle where a child whimpered in faint misery.
The room was utterly bare of any furniture save the poor substitutes
of a number of packing-cases of various sizes. The little home which
Jim had established, which Ann had worked so passionately to improve,
was a home no longer. It was merely a squalid shelter for squalid human
animals.

 Ann, on her knees by the child, looked up to the three figures in the
centre of the room, her attention suddenly challenged by the clash of
angry voices.

 A tall man, fierce, with a shock of untidy hair falling on a narrow
brow, a vivid red tie overwhelming the soft collar which kept it in
place, was pointing a quivering finger at her husband's breast.

 "You call yourself the leader of these men," he was saying, in a rage
of scorn, "and you flaunt that scrap of coloured rag—you advertise
your pride that you helped the bourgeois to fight his war! Take it
off, man—fling it down and trample on it! The red on it is the blood
of your fellow-workers!"

 "Aye, that's just what it is, Laurence," said the ex-soldier with
equal anger. "And I am proud of it. I'm proud that I did my bit for
England—for England's ours, too, as well as the capitalists', and the
war was our war, the war of the crowd of us—and we went out and risked
our lives while you and your cowardly kind stayed at home and helped
the enemy all you could. That's your patriotism! And now to hear you
talk one would think England was an enemy country! I tell you it's our
country as much as anybody's and our war that we fought for it! The red
on this medal ribbon is the red of the blood of the chaps that died for
it if you like—and I'm mighty proud to wear it. And, by God, Laurence,
while I'm the leader of these poor chaps I won't have any traitor
talk—is that clear?"

 "Your country!" the other laughed bitterly. "What right have you got to
a ha'porth of it?—you, who are being chucked out into the street—you,
who haven't even the right to demand work and earn your bread! Bah!
Militarism has rotted the soul of you!"

 "It taught me to know a true man when I see him, anyway, Laurence—and
you're none o' that kind! You, poisoning the minds of starving men——"

 "And who keeps 'em starving? Who prevents 'em from helping themselves
in the nearest baker's shop——"

 "Now, lads—now, lads!" intervened the third man, a thick-set fellow
in black coat and turned-up trousers over yellow boots. A smug
self-confidence was native to his podgy countenance, was the complement
of the cunning, scheming eyes. "There's no use quarrelling. What we've
got to do is to 'elp each other—we working-men. The Union's bust ,
Jim, an' that's the fact of it—an' if Mr. Laurence's organization 'ere
can't give us a 'and—well, I don't know what'll happen. This last
trick of 'Athaway's, chucking the whole street out o' doors, fairly
puts the lid on it!"

 There was silence in the room and Jim glanced round at the haggard
visage of his wife, bending, with tears on her cheeks, over the
whimpering child.

 "Yes, look!" said the tall man. "That's what you fought for, my lad!"

 Jim did not reply. He pressed his hand to his brow as though his brain
reeled. The Trade Union leader tried to profit by his silence.

 "We're properly up against it—there's no dodging it. Mind you, Jim, I
think there's a lot of reason in what Mr. Laurence says."

 Ann stood up quickly and faced her husband.

 "Jim!" she said, and her voice was firm though her chest heaved with
weakness. "You'll do what's right—whatever 'appens!"

 Laurence spoke again.

 "We're perfectly ready to help—but this is the last time of offering.
You know the terms. You're responsible for a good many hundreds of
starving families, Swain—they mayn't listen to you much longer, don't
forget——"

  He was interrupted by fierce shouts in the street below, the reiterated
blasts of a motor-horn, the crash of broken glass, a whir of machinery
and yet fiercer shouts. All three rushed to the window. Below them a
motor-car was stationary in the midst of a surging mob. The chauffeur
lay senseless amid the debris of a shattered wind-screen. In the rear
seat a youngish man was defending himself vigorously against the rain
of blows showered on him by the mob which clambered on to the vehicle.

 "My God! Captain Hathaway!" Even as Jim shouted he had turned to dash
down the stairs.

 He flung himself into the fierce mob as once before he had rushed at
the knot of Germans with bombs poised to throw, his captain an imminent
victim. Old instincts surged to supremacy—he fought his way blindly to
the car in a blur of blows. A second later he had dragged a dazed man
into the entrance of the house, had slammed the door.

 "Come on, sir—come upstairs and sit down." Jim forgot for the moment
the wretched room to which he invited him. He was living in a memory
of the trench days where he had sometimes dreamed that his beloved
captain might on some incredible occasion sit at tea with them in a
nice little home and tell Ann that her husband had been a good soldier.
Half supporting him, he pushed him into the apartment, pulled a box out
for him to sit on.

 "Here you are, sir. Take it easy for a minute. You'll soon be all
right."

 Captain Hathaway put his hand to a damp fore head, looked stupidly at
the blood on it, and then, still dazed, stared at his rescuer.

 "What?—Swain?" He smiled faintly. "For the second time, eh?"

 "Yes, sir—I'm glad to say!"

 The tall man picked up his soft hat, glaring from Jim to the employer
he had rescued.

 "Come on, Bruxby," he said, in a voice quivering with anger. "There's
nothing more for us here—the man's a d—d scab!"

 Jim listened to the heavy feet of the pair of them tramping down the
staircase.

 Captain Hathaway looked around him, then took a deep breath and stood
up.

 "I'm all right again now. It's all come back to me. Swain," he put his
hand on the man's shoulder, "will you believe me when I say I quite
understand—and that's it a shame, a d—d shame! I've been away. I
couldn't do anything till now." He looked at the woman by the cradle,
held out his hand. "This is Mrs. Swain?" She stood staring at him,
making no responsive movement. "Look here, I want to help—here"—his
hand dived into his pocket, fished up a bundle of notes—"why, you're
starving, woman!" He thrust them into her hand and she let them fall on
the floor.

 "I want work, Captain Hathaway—not charity," said Ann, shaking with
temptation resisted.

 The ex-officer turned to his man.

 "Swain," he said. "I haven't been blind to all this—but, believe me, I
couldn't do anything till now. I want to talk to you. Will you listen
to me?"

  It was some time later when Captain Hathaway (who had already seen his
chauffeur into a police ambulance while Jim harangued the crowd into
sullenness) drove his car down to the great gates of Hathaway's works.
Jim Swain, the men's leader, sat by his side.

  In the long boardroom, with its thick Turkey carpet, its heavy mahogany
furniture, its framed photographs of former directors, the controllers
of Hathaway's and its linked houses sat already at the council-table.
The air was heavy with cigar smoke when Captain Hathaway entered.

 "Sorry I'm late, gentlemen—no,—a little accident—I'm quite all
right—nothing at all serious," so he responded to the queries evoked
by his cut forehead as he sat down.

 His father rose, pompous, full-cheeked, settling his pince-nez with
one hand, while he gathered together a little sheaf of papers with the
other.

 "Gentlemen," he said, "to-day I have to communicate to you officially
what I think all of you know privately—a communication which (hem!)
marks another epoch in the successful history of the house of
Hathaway. I have transferred to my son, Captain Hathaway—who has
not unsuccessfully graduated in the stern business of war—(Hear,
hear!)—my controlling interest in all the enterprises of which
hitherto I have been the head. I propose—and I believe you will second
me in this—that Captain Hathaway be duly elected to the board as
managing director." (It would have been difficult for the audience
to have disputed this had they wished. There was a unanimous "Hear,
hear!") Sir Thomas Hathaway passed a bulky envelope across to his son.
"Here, Harry, I give you all the deeds of transfer, duly executed and
dated as from yesterday. You are now the head of Hathaway and Company!"
There was a faint sketch of a cheer from the fat old gentlemen round
the table.

 "Now, gentlemen," continued the retiring chief, "before I sit down,
I should like to give you some account of my stewardship. I think
we all of us perceived in the circumstances of the present time an
opportunity to settle, once and for all, our score with Labour. That
opportunity has not been neglected. All the factories controlled by
us, in agreement with the other houses in the trade—which have most
loyally backed our action—have been shut down. The date of their
reopening has not yet been decided upon, but I may tell you this,
gentlemen, the Trade Union with which we have had so much trouble in
the past is bankrupt . We are entitled to industrial peace, on our
own terms—but the terms which we have offered, and which were not
ungenerous in the circumstances after safeguarding our interests, have
been stubbornly rejected by the men's leader—the man Swain. This
left us no alternative but to put on the screw—and we have replied
by serving notices of ejection on all those of our ex-employees who
are behindhand in their rent. I think you will agree with me that in
this we have the fullest justice on our side! (Hear, hear!) And now,
gentlemen, I retire from my managing directorship and make way for my
son, in the fullest confidence that he will maintain and extend the
great and honourable traditions of this business."

 Captain Hathaway stood up. His face was strangely pale and set.

 "Gentlemen, you have listened to my father's remarks. They represent
accurately the theory of our past relationship between ourselves and
our employees. (Hear, hear!) But, gentlemen, I want to bring home to
you that it is a theory quite impossible to maintain at the present
day! In accepting the leadership of this house, I am fully conscious
of my responsibilities—responsibilities not only to you who have
financial interests in the business, but to those who live by the
employment we offer them and to the State which makes it possible for
them to work and for ourselves to derive profit from that work. From
this day, gentlemen, and for so long as I am head of this firm, our
relations with our employees are on a different basis. The factories
will reopen to-morrow—at the old Trade Union rates, excepting where
the new rates I have offered to the men are more remunerative to them.
The policy of the firm is reversed!"

 Captain Hathaway, in all his experience of war, had never felt the need
of all his courage so much as in making this announcement—which, to
himself, sounded brutally bald.

 One of the directors rose, banging nervously upon the table with his
fist, and shaking with rage.

  "By God!" he said, "I never thought Tom Hathaway's boy would be a
traitor!"

 Sir Thomas Hathaway half rose, and sat down again—looking as though he
were going to faint.

 Another of the directors stood up.

 "Has our new managing director any other harmless little proposals to
make?" he asked, in bitter sarcasm.

 "Yes," replied Captain Hathaway, "I propose to take powers to create
a new Deferred Stock which will rank for dividend after the Ordinary
Stock has received eight per cent, but which will in all circumstances
carry a right to vote on the board—and this stock will be vested in
the representatives of our employees, chosen by them."

 "It will never be agreed to by the men!" cried a voice.

 "It is agreed to already by the men's representatives," replied the
new chief, feeling the coolness of courage return to him as once when
he had faced the mob of Germans.

 The wealthiest of the directors, a man associated with other houses in
the trade, rose in his turn.

 "I warn you, Hathaway, that I shall dispose of my interests in this
business—and I'm going to fight you to the last shilling! You'll be
broke in a year!" "All of us! All of us!" came a chorus of approval.
"We'll all fight! This is sheer madness!"

 "Fight, if you will, gentlemen," said Hathaway calmly. "It won't pay
you. I haven't been idle these three months. I may tell you that I
have contracts in my pocket that will keep us going for many months
to come—more than a year. The whole world is shrieking for goods, and
Germany is supplying them—capturing your markets while you commit
suicide in trying to get the better of Labour. In these last months I
have established agents all over the world—and I've got the orders!
I know what the other houses have got—I know what's open to you—you can't fight us!—but you'll be taken over by the Government if your
obstinacy continues this unworthy industrial strife."

 There was a silence of vague-headed, angry old men who did not quite
know what to say.

 "And now, gentlemen," continued Hathaway. "Let me plead for a better
spirit. That great mass of human beings you coldly call Labour fought
for England just as I fought for England, just as thousands and
thousands of our own class fought. We've been together in the trenches
year in year out and we've learnt to know each other, not as hostile
abstractions, but as living men,—good men, the most of us. We learnt
all sorts of things we didn't realize before the war, but most of
all we learnt—and when I say we, I mean your sons as well —that
we're all Englishmen and that we all have to play the game and stick
together—officer and man. D'you think I who have watched over the
comfort of my men, taught them, led them into danger and seen them
unafraid, who have hungered with them, thirsted with them, gloried in
them for these last long years—d'you think I can coldly condemn those
men and their wives and children to starvation now? D'you think I can
treat them as an enemy? I can't. And the men who have been proud of
us, their officers,—d'you think they haven't learnt the value of
leadership? They have—but not the leadership of a slave-master. In the
long bitter years of strife those men have won for themselves a freedom
of soul which is the life-force of a free Empire! Class-hatred! It has
vanished as between officer and man. We're all Englishmen together—and
we're going to work, share and share alike, in the new England, that,
share and share alike, we fought for!" He flung open the door behind
him. "Here, gentlemen, is Jim Swain, the leader of your work-people in
their time of trouble. He saved my life twice—once in the trenches
and got a D.C.M. when he ought to have had the V.C.—and again to-day
when he set a seal of comradeship between the managing director and the
employees of Hathaway's. Together, he and I, and those we represent,
are going to make our patch of England worth the lives that were spent
to save it!"

 There was a hush in the room, and into that hush came the strains of a
military band playing a regiment to the neighbouring railway station.
It played the familiar marching tune of the old days, and a flaw of
wind brought masculine voices in the uplift of the chorus.

  "... There's a silver lining



 Through the dark clouds shining,



 Turn the dark cloud inside out,



 For the boys are home!"





 "They're coming back!" cried Captain Hathaway. "Coming back in their
thousands and their millions—officers and men—your sons at the
head of the men they have learned to love! Comrades that can never
be estranged! We're the new generation, gentlemen—the old order has
gone—never to return—we've come back, Swain and I, from the borders
of death that has taught us how precious life may be."

 The heads, bald and florid, of that obese elder generation turned in
a community of curious interest, to gaze at Swain—the man who had
nerved his fellows to withstand an economic pressure they had thought
irresistible and was now hailed as comrade by their own young chief.

 The ex-soldier took a step forward.

 "I should just like to say this, sirs—we men know what it is to have
good officers—and we've never let 'em down. We've come back, officers
and men, and officers like Captain Hathaway will always find their
men work for them as they used to fight—for officers like him make
us feel the Old Country is worth working for as it was worth fighting
for. We've learnt to play the game—and we'll play it so long as we
have fair play. The British soldier has learnt to die rather than
surrender—and the British soldier is just the British working-man."

  PRINTED BY



 WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON, LTD



 PLYMOUTH, ENGLAND





 

 

  ***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BATTLEWRACK***

 ******* This file should be named 60530-h.htm or 60530-h.zip *******

 This and all associated files of various formats will be found in: 

  Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

 Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

 START: FULL LICENSE 

 

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE 

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

 To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

 Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

 1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

 1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

 1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

 1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

 1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

 1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

 This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United
  States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost
  no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
  it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with
  this eBook or online
  at . If you
  are not located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws
  of the country where you are located before using this
  ebook.

 1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

 1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

 1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

 1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

 1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

 1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

 1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

  You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

 You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.



 1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

 1.F.

 1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

 1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

 1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

 1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

 1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

 1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

 Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

 Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

 Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.

 Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

 The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

 The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

 For additional contact information:

 Dr. Gregory B. Newby 

Chief Executive and Director 

gbnewby@pglaf.org

 Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

 Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

 The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit .

 While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

 International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

 Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

 Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

 Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

 Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

 Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

 This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.