THOU ART THE MAN
    

      I will now play the Oedipus to the Rattleborough enigma. I will expound to
      you—as I alone can—the secret of the enginery that effected
      the Rattleborough miracle—the one, the true, the admitted, the
      undisputed, the indisputable miracle, which put a definite end to
      infidelity among the Rattleburghers and converted to the orthodoxy of the
      grandames all the carnal-minded who had ventured to be sceptical before.
    

      This event—which I should be sorry to discuss in a tone of
      unsuitable levity—occurred in the summer of 18—. Mr. Barnabas
      Shuttleworthy—one of the wealthiest and most respectable citizens of
      the borough—had been missing for several days under circumstances
      which gave rise to suspicion of foul play. Mr. Shuttleworthy had set out
      from Rattleborough very early one Saturday morning, on horseback, with the
      avowed intention of proceeding to the city of-, about fifteen miles
      distant, and of returning the night of the same day. Two hours after his
      departure, however, his horse returned without him, and without the
      saddle-bags which had been strapped on his back at starting. The animal
      was wounded, too, and covered with mud. These circumstances naturally gave
      rise to much alarm among the friends of the missing man; and when it was
      found, on Sunday morning, that he had not yet made his appearance, the
      whole borough arose en masse to go and look for his body.
    

      The foremost and most energetic in instituting this search was the bosom
      friend of Mr. Shuttleworthy—a Mr. Charles Goodfellow, or, as he was
      universally called, “Charley Goodfellow,” or “Old
      Charley Goodfellow.” Now, whether it is a marvellous coincidence, or
      whether it is that the name itself has an imperceptible effect upon the
      character, I have never yet been able to ascertain; but the fact is
      unquestionable, that there never yet was any person named Charles who was
      not an open, manly, honest, good-natured, and frank-hearted fellow, with a
      rich, clear voice, that did you good to hear it, and an eye that looked
      you always straight in the face, as much as to say: “I have a clear
      conscience myself, am afraid of no man, and am altogether above doing a
      mean action.” And thus all the hearty, careless, “walking
      gentlemen” of the stage are very certain to be called Charles.
    

      Now, “Old Charley Goodfellow,” although he had been in
      Rattleborough not longer than six months or thereabouts, and although
      nobody knew any thing about him before he came to settle in the
      neighborhood, had experienced no difficulty in the world in making the
      acquaintance of all the respectable people in the borough. Not a man of
      them but would have taken his bare word for a thousand at any moment; and
      as for the women, there is no saying what they would not have done to
      oblige him. And all this came of his having been christened Charles, and
      of his possessing, in consequence, that ingenuous face which is
      proverbially the very “best letter of recommendation.”
    

      I have already said that Mr. Shuttleworthy was one of the most respectable
      and, undoubtedly, he was the most wealthy man in Rattleborough, while
      “Old Charley Goodfellow” was upon as intimate terms with him
      as if he had been his own brother. The two old gentlemen were next-door
      neighbours, and, although Mr. Shuttleworthy seldom, if ever, visited
      “Old Charley,” and never was known to take a meal in his
      house, still this did not prevent the two friends from being exceedingly
      intimate, as I have just observed; for “Old Charley” never let
      a day pass without stepping in three or four times to see how his
      neighbour came on, and very often he would stay to breakfast or tea, and
      almost always to dinner, and then the amount of wine that was made way
      with by the two cronies at a sitting, it would really be a difficult thing
      to ascertain. “Old Charleys” favorite beverage was
      Chateau-Margaux, and it appeared to do Mr. Shuttleworthy’s heart
      good to see the old fellow swallow it, as he did, quart after quart; so
      that, one day, when the wine was in and the wit as a natural consequence,
      somewhat out, he said to his crony, as he slapped him upon the back—“I
      tell you what it is, ‘Old Charley,’ you are, by all odds, the
      heartiest old fellow I ever came across in all my born days; and, since
      you love to guzzle the wine at that fashion, I’ll be darned if I don’t
      have to make thee a present of a big box of the Chateau-Margaux. Od rot
      me,”—(Mr. Shuttleworthy had a sad habit of swearing, although
      he seldom went beyond “Od rot me,” or “By gosh,”
      or “By the jolly golly,”)—“Od rot me,” says
      he, “if I don’t send an order to town this very afternoon for
      a double box of the best that can be got, and I’ll make ye a present
      of it, I will!—ye needn’t say a word now—I will, I tell
      ye, and there’s an end of it; so look out for it—it will come
      to hand some of these fine days, precisely when ye are looking for it the
      least!” I mention this little bit of liberality on the part of Mr.
      Shuttleworthy, just by way of showing you how very intimate an
      understanding existed between the two friends.
    

      Well, on the Sunday morning in question, when it came to be fairly
      understood that Mr. Shuttleworthy had met with foul play, I never saw any
      one so profoundly affected as “Old Charley Goodfellow.” When
      he first heard that the horse had come home without his master, and
      without his master’s saddle-bags, and all bloody from a pistol-shot,
      that had gone clean through and through the poor animal’s chest
      without quite killing him; when he heard all this, he turned as pale as if
      the missing man had been his own dear brother or father, and shivered and
      shook all over as if he had had a fit of the ague.
    

      At first he was too much overpowered with grief to be able to do any thing
      at all, or to concert upon any plan of action; so that for a long time he
      endeavored to dissuade Mr. Shuttleworthy’s other friends from making
      a stir about the matter, thinking it best to wait awhile—say for a
      week or two, or a month, or two—to see if something wouldn’t
      turn up, or if Mr. Shuttleworthy wouldn’t come in the natural way,
      and explain his reasons for sending his horse on before. I dare say you
      have often observed this disposition to temporize, or to procrastinate, in
      people who are labouring under any very poignant sorrow. Their powers of
      mind seem to be rendered torpid, so that they have a horror of any thing
      like action, and like nothing in the world so well as to lie quietly in
      bed and “nurse their grief,” as the old ladies express it—that
      is to say, ruminate over the trouble.
    

      The people of Rattleborough had, indeed, so high an opinion of the wisdom
      and discretion of “Old Charley,” that the greater part of them
      felt disposed to agree with him, and not make a stir in the business
      “until something should turn up,” as the honest old gentleman
      worded it; and I believe that, after all this would have been the general
      determination, but for the very suspicious interference of Mr.
      Shuttleworthy’s nephew, a young man of very dissipated habits, and
      otherwise of rather bad character. This nephew, whose name was
      Pennifeather, would listen to nothing like reason in the matter of “lying
      quiet,” but insisted upon making immediate search for the “corpse
      of the murdered man.”—This was the expression he employed; and
      Mr. Goodfellow acutely remarked at the time, that it was “a singular
      expression, to say no more.” This remark of ‘Old Charley’s,’
      too, had great effect upon the crowd; and one of the party was heard to
      ask, very impressively, “how it happened that young Mr. Pennifeather
      was so intimately cognizant of all the circumstances connected with his
      wealthy uncle’s disappearance, as to feel authorized to assert,
      distinctly and unequivocally, that his uncle was ‘a murdered man.’”
      Hereupon some little squibbing and bickering occurred among various
      members of the crowd, and especially between “Old Charley” and
      Mr. Pennifeather—although this latter occurrence was, indeed, by no
      means a novelty, for no good will had subsisted between the parties for
      the last three or four months; and matters had even gone so far that Mr.
      Pennifeather had actually knocked down his uncles friend for some alleged
      excess of liberty that the latter had taken in the uncle’s house, of
      which the nephew was an inmate. Upon this occasion “Old Charley”
      is said to have behaved with exemplary moderation and Christian charity.
      He arose from the blow, adjusted his clothes, and made no attempt at
      retaliation at all—merely muttering a few words about “taking
      summary vengeance at the first convenient opportunity,”—a
      natural and very justifiable ebullition of anger, which meant nothing,
      however, and, beyond doubt, was no sooner given vent to than forgotten.
    

      However these matters may be (which have no reference to the point now at
      issue), it is quite certain that the people of Rattleborough, principally
      through the persuasion of Mr. Pennifeather, came at length to the
      determination of dispersion over the adjacent country in search of the
      missing Mr. Shuttleworthy. I say they came to this determination in the
      first instance. After it had been fully resolved that a search should be
      made, it was considered almost a matter of course that the seekers should
      disperse—that is to say, distribute themselves in parties—for
      the more thorough examination of the region round about. I forget,
      however, by what ingenious train of reasoning it was that “Old
      Charley” finally convinced the assembly that this was the most
      injudicious plan that could be pursued. Convince them, however, he did—all
      except Mr. Pennifeather, and, in the end, it was arranged that a search
      should be instituted, carefully and very thoroughly, by the burghers en
      masse, “Old Charley” himself leading the way.
    

      As for the matter of that, there could have been no better pioneer than
      “Old Charley,” whom everybody knew to have the eye of a lynx;
      but, although he led them into all manner of out-of-the-way holes and
      corners, by routes that nobody had ever suspected of existing in the
      neighbourhood, and although the search was incessantly kept up day and
      night for nearly a week, still no trace of Mr. Shuttleworthy could be
      discovered. When I say no trace, however, I must not be understood to
      speak literally, for trace, to some extent, there certainly was. The poor
      gentleman had been tracked, by his horses shoes (which were peculiar), to
      a spot about three miles to the east of the borough, on the main road
      leading to the city. Here the track made off into a by-path through a
      piece of woodland—the path coming out again into the main road, and
      cutting off about half a mile of the regular distance. Following the
      shoe-marks down this lane, the party came at length to a pool of stagnant
      water, half hidden by the brambles, to the right of the lane, and opposite
      this pool all vestige of the track was lost sight of. It appeared,
      however, that a struggle of some nature had here taken place, and it
      seemed as if some large and heavy body, much larger and heavier than a
      man, had been drawn from the by-path to the pool. This latter was
      carefully dragged twice, but nothing was found; and the party was upon the
      point of going away, in despair of coming to any result, when Providence
      suggested to Mr. Goodfellow the expediency of draining the water off
      altogether. This project was received with cheers, and many high
      compliments to “Old Charley” upon his sagacity and
      consideration. As many of the burghers had brought spades with them,
      supposing that they might possibly be called upon to disinter a corpse,
      the drain was easily and speedily effected; and no sooner was the bottom
      visible, than right in the middle of the mud that remained was discovered
      a black silk velvet waistcoat, which nearly every one present immediately
      recognized as the property of Mr. Pennifeather. This waistcoat was much
      torn and stained with blood, and there were several persons among the
      party who had a distinct remembrance of its having been worn by its owner
      on the very morning of Mr. Shuttleworthy’s departure for the city;
      while there were others, again, ready to testify upon oath, if required,
      that Mr. P. did not wear the garment in question at any period during the
      remainder of that memorable day, nor could any one be found to say that he
      had seen it upon Mr. P.‘s person at any period at all subsequent to
      Mr. Shuttleworthy’s disappearance.
    

      Matters now wore a very serious aspect for Mr. Pennifeather, and it was
      observed, as an indubitable confirmation of the suspicions which were
      excited against him, that he grew exceedingly pale, and when asked what he
      had to say for himself, was utterly incapable of saying a word. Hereupon,
      the few friends his riotous mode of living had left him, deserted him at
      once to a man, and were even more clamorous than his ancient and avowed
      enemies for his instantaneous arrest. But, on the other hand, the
      magnanimity of Mr. Goodfellow shone forth with only the more brilliant
      lustre through contrast. He made a warm and intensely eloquent defence of
      Mr. Pennifeather, in which he alluded more than once to his own sincere
      forgiveness of that wild young gentleman—“the heir of the
      worthy Mr. Shuttleworthy,”—for the insult which he (the young
      gentleman) had, no doubt in the heat of passion, thought proper to put
      upon him (Mr. Goodfellow). “He forgave him for it,” he said,
      “from the very bottom of his heart; and for himself (Mr.
      Goodfellow), so far from pushing the suspicious circumstances to
      extremity, which he was sorry to say, really had arisen against Mr.
      Pennifeather, he (Mr. Goodfellow) would make every exertion in his power,
      would employ all the little eloquence in his possession to—to—to—soften
      down, as much as he could conscientiously do so, the worst features of
      this really exceedingly perplexing piece of business.”
    

      Mr. Goodfellow went on for some half hour longer in this strain, very much
      to the credit both of his head and of his heart; but your warm-hearted
      people are seldom apposite in their observations—they run into all
      sorts of blunders, contre-temps and mal apropos-isms, in the
      hot-headedness of their zeal to serve a friend—thus, often with the
      kindest intentions in the world, doing infinitely more to prejudice his
      cause than to advance it.
    

      So, in the present instance, it turned out with all the eloquence of
      “Old Charley”; for, although he laboured earnestly in behalf
      of the suspected, yet it so happened, somehow or other, that every
      syllable he uttered of which the direct but unwitting tendency was not to
      exalt the speaker in the good opinion of his audience, had the effect to
      deepen the suspicion already attached to the individual whose cause he
      pleaded, and to arouse against him the fury of the mob.
    

      One of the most unaccountable errors committed by the orator was his
      allusion to the suspected as “the heir of the worthy old gentleman
      Mr. Shuttleworthy.” The people had really never thought of this
      before. They had only remembered certain threats of disinheritance uttered
      a year or two previously by the uncle (who had no living relative except
      the nephew), and they had, therefore, always looked upon this
      disinheritance as a matter that was settled—so single-minded a race
      of beings were the Rattleburghers; but the remark of “Old Charley”
      brought them at once to a consideration of this point, and thus gave them
      to see the possibility of the threats having been nothing more than a
      threat. And straightway hereupon, arose the natural question of cui bono?—a
      question that tended even more than the waistcoat to fasten the terrible
      crime upon the young man. And here, lest I may be misunderstood, permit me
      to digress for one moment merely to observe that the exceedingly brief and
      simple Latin phrase which I have employed, is invariably mistranslated and
      misconceived. “Cui bono?” in all the crack novels and
      elsewhere,—in those of Mrs. Gore, for example, (the author of
      “Cecil,”) a lady who quotes all tongues from the Chaldaean to
      Chickasaw, and is helped to her learning, “as needed,” upon a
      systematic plan, by Mr. Beckford,—in all the crack novels, I say,
      from those of Bulwer and Dickens to those of Bulwer and Dickens to those
      of Turnapenny and Ainsworth, the two little Latin words cui bono are
      rendered “to what purpose?” or, (as if quo bono,) “to
      what good.” Their true meaning, nevertheless, is “for whose
      advantage.” Cui, to whom; bono, is it for a benefit. It is a purely
      legal phrase, and applicable precisely in cases such as we have now under
      consideration, where the probability of the doer of a deed hinges upon the
      probability of the benefit accruing to this individual or to that from the
      deed’s accomplishment. Now in the present instance, the question cui
      bono? very pointedly implicated Mr. Pennifeather. His uncle had threatened
      him, after making a will in his favour, with disinheritance. But the
      threat had not been actually kept; the original will, it appeared, had not
      been altered. Had it been altered, the only supposable motive for murder
      on the part of the suspected would have been the ordinary one of revenge;
      and even this would have been counteracted by the hope of reinstation into
      the good graces of the uncle. But the will being unaltered, while the
      threat to alter remained suspended over the nephew’s head, there
      appears at once the very strongest possible inducement for the atrocity,
      and so concluded, very sagaciously, the worthy citizens of the borough of
      Rattle.
    

      Mr. Pennifeather was, accordingly, arrested upon the spot, and the crowd,
      after some further search, proceeded homeward, having him in custody. On
      the route, however, another circumstance occurred tending to confirm the
      suspicion entertained. Mr. Goodfellow, whose zeal led him to be always a
      little in advance of the party, was seen suddenly to run forward a few
      paces, stoop, and then apparently to pick up some small object from the
      grass. Having quickly examined it he was observed, too, to make a sort of
      half attempt at concealing it in his coat pocket; but this action was
      noticed, as I say, and consequently prevented, when the object picked up
      was found to be a Spanish knife which a dozen persons at once recognized
      as belonging to Mr. Pennifeather. Moreover, his initials were engraved
      upon the handle. The blade of this knife was open and bloody.
    

      No doubt now remained of the guilt of the nephew, and immediately upon
      reaching Rattleborough he was taken before a magistrate for examination.
    

      Here matters again took a most unfavourable turn. The prisoner, being
      questioned as to his whereabouts on the morning of Mr. Shuttleworthy’s
      disappearance, had absolutely the audacity to acknowledge that on that
      very morning he had been out with his rifle deer-stalking, in the
      immediate neighbourhood of the pool where the blood-stained waistcoat had
      been discovered through the sagacity of Mr. Goodfellow.
    

      This latter now came forward, and, with tears in his eyes, asked
      permission to be examined. He said that a stern sense of the duty he owed
      his Maker, not less than his fellow-men, would permit him no longer to
      remain silent. Hitherto, the sincerest affection for the young man
      (notwithstanding the latter’s ill-treatment of himself, Mr.
      Goodfellow) had induced him to make every hypothesis which imagination
      could suggest, by way of endeavoring to account for what appeared
      suspicious in the circumstances that told so seriously against Mr.
      Pennifeather, but these circumstances were now altogether too convincing—too
      damning, he would hesitate no longer—he would tell all he knew,
      although his heart (Mr. Goodfellow’s) should absolutely burst
      asunder in the effort. He then went on to state that, on the afternoon of
      the day previous to Mr. Shuttleworthy’s departure for the city, that
      worthy old gentleman had mentioned to his nephew, in his hearing (Mr.
      Goodfellow’s), that his object in going to town on the morrow was to
      make a deposit of an unusually large sum of money in the “Farmers
      and Mechanics’ Bank,” and that, then and there, the said Mr.
      Shuttleworthy had distinctly avowed to the said nephew his irrevocable
      determination of rescinding the will originally made, and of cutting him
      off with a shilling. He (the witness) now solemnly called upon the accused
      to state whether what he (the witness) had just stated was or was not the
      truth in every substantial particular. Much to the astonishment of every
      one present, Mr. Pennifeather frankly admitted that it was.
    

      The magistrate now considered it his duty to send a couple of constables
      to search the chamber of the accused in the house of his uncle. From this
      search they almost immediately returned with the well-known steel-bound,
      russet leather pocket-book which the old gentleman had been in the habit
      of carrying for years. Its valuable contents, however, had been
      abstracted, and the magistrate in vain endeavored to extort from the
      prisoner the use which had been made of them, or the place of their
      concealment. Indeed, he obstinately denied all knowledge of the matter.
      The constables, also, discovered, between the bed and sacking of the
      unhappy man, a shirt and neck-handkerchief both marked with the initials
      of his name, and both hideously besmeared with the blood of the victim.
    

      At this juncture, it was announced that the horse of the murdered man had
      just expired in the stable from the effects of the wound he had received,
      and it was proposed by Mr. Goodfellow that a post mortem examination of
      the beast should be immediately made, with the view, if possible, of
      discovering the ball. This was accordingly done; and, as if to demonstrate
      beyond a question the guilt of the accused, Mr. Goodfellow, after
      considerable searching in the cavity of the chest was enabled to detect
      and to pull forth a bullet of very extraordinary size, which, upon trial,
      was found to be exactly adapted to the bore of Mr. Pennifeather’s
      rifle, while it was far too large for that of any other person in the
      borough or its vicinity. To render the matter even surer yet, however,
      this bullet was discovered to have a flaw or seam at right angles to the
      usual suture, and upon examination, this seam corresponded precisely with
      an accidental ridge or elevation in a pair of moulds acknowledged by the
      accused himself to be his own property. Upon finding of this bullet, the
      examining magistrate refused to listen to any farther testimony, and
      immediately committed the prisoner for trial-declining resolutely to take
      any bail in the case, although against this severity Mr. Goodfellow very
      warmly remonstrated, and offered to become surety in whatever amount might
      be required. This generosity on the part of “Old Charley” was
      only in accordance with the whole tenour of his amiable and chivalrous
      conduct during the entire period of his sojourn in the borough of Rattle.
      In the present instance the worthy man was so entirely carried away by the
      excessive warmth of his sympathy, that he seemed to have quite forgotten,
      when he offered to go bail for his young friend, that he himself (Mr.
      Goodfellow) did not possess a single dollar’s worth of property upon
      the face of the earth.
    

      The result of the committal may be readily foreseen. Mr. Pennifeather,
      amid the loud execrations of all Rattleborough, was brought to trial at
      the next criminal sessions, when the chain of circumstantial evidence
      (strengthened as it was by some additional damning facts, which Mr.
      Goodfellow’s sensitive conscientiousness forbade him to withhold
      from the court) was considered so unbroken and so thoroughly conclusive,
      that the jury, without leaving their seats, returned an immediate verdict
      of “Guilty of murder in the first degree.” Soon afterward the
      unhappy wretch received sentence of death, and was remanded to the county
      jail to await the inexorable vengeance of the law.
    

      In the meantime, the noble behavior of “Old Charley Goodfellow,”
      had doubly endeared him to the honest citizens of the borough. He became
      ten times a greater favorite than ever, and, as a natural result of the
      hospitality with which he was treated, he relaxed, as it were, perforce,
      the extremely parsimonious habits which his poverty had hitherto impelled
      him to observe, and very frequently had little reunions at his own house,
      when wit and jollity reigned supreme-dampened a little, of course, by the
      occasional remembrance of the untoward and melancholy fate which impended
      over the nephew of the late lamented bosom friend of the generous host.
    

      One fine day, this magnanimous old gentleman was agreeably surprised at
      the receipt of the following letter:-
    

 Charles Goodfellow, Esq., Rattleborough
 From H.F.B. & Co.
 Chat. Mar. A—No. 1.—6 doz. bottles (1/2 Gross)

 “Charles Goodfellow, Esquire.

 “Dear Sir—In conformity with an order transmitted to our firm about
 two months since, by our esteemed correspondent, Mr. Barnabus
 Shuttleworthy, we have the honor of forwarding this morning, to your
 address, a double box of Chateau-Margaux of the antelope brand, violet
 seal. Box numbered and marked as per margin.

 “We remain, sir,
         “Your most ob’nt ser’ts,
                 “HOGGS, FROGS, BOGS, & CO.

 “City of—, June 21, 18—.

 “P.S.—The box will reach you by wagon, on the day after your receipt
 of this letter. Our respects to Mr. Shuttleworthy.

                  “H., F., B., & CO.”
 

      The fact is, that Mr. Goodfellow had, since the death of Mr.
      Shuttleworthy, given over all expectation of ever receiving the promised
      Chateau-Margaux; and he, therefore, looked upon it now as a sort of
      especial dispensation of Providence in his behalf. He was highly
      delighted, of course, and in the exuberance of his joy invited a large
      party of friends to a petit souper on the morrow, for the purpose of
      broaching the good old Mr. Shuttleworthy’s present. Not that he said
      any thing about “the good old Mr. Shuttleworthy” when he
      issued the invitations. The fact is, he thought much and concluded to say
      nothing at all. He did not mention to any one—if I remember aright—that
      he had received a present of Chateau-Margaux. He merely asked his friends
      to come and help him drink some, of a remarkable fine quality and rich
      flavour, that he had ordered up from the city a couple of months ago, and
      of which he would be in the receipt upon the morrow. I have often puzzled
      myself to imagine why it was that “Old Charley” came to the
      conclusion to say nothing about having received the wine from his old
      friend, but I could never precisely understand his reason for the silence,
      although he had some excellent and very magnanimous reason, no doubt.
    

      The morrow at length arrived, and with it a very large and highly
      respectable company at Mr. Goodfellow’s house. Indeed, half the
      borough was there,—I myself among the number,—but, much to the
      vexation of the host, the Chateau-Margaux did not arrive until a late
      hour, and when the sumptuous supper supplied by “Old Charley”
      had been done very ample justice by the guests. It came at length,
      however,—a monstrously big box of it there was, too—and as the
      whole party were in excessively good humor, it was decided, nem. con.,
      that it should be lifted upon the table and its contents disembowelled
      forthwith.
    

      No sooner said than done. I lent a helping hand; and, in a trice we had
      the box upon the table, in the midst of all the bottles and glasses, not a
      few of which were demolished in the scuffle. “Old Charley,”
      who was pretty much intoxicated, and excessively red in the face, now took
      a seat, with an air of mock dignity, at the head of the board, and thumped
      furiously upon it with a decanter, calling upon the company to keep order
      “during the ceremony of disinterring the treasure.”
    

      After some vociferation, quiet was at length fully restored, and, as very
      often happens in similar cases, a profound and remarkable silence ensued.
      Being then requested to force open the lid, I complied, of course, “with
      an infinite deal of pleasure.” I inserted a chisel, and giving it a
      few slight taps with a hammer, the top of the box flew suddenly off, and
      at the same instant, there sprang up into a sitting position, directly
      facing the host, the bruised, bloody, and nearly putrid corpse of the
      murdered Mr. Shuttleworthy himself. It gazed for a few seconds, fixedly
      and sorrowfully, with its decaying and lack-lustre eyes, full into the
      countenance of Mr. Goodfellow; uttered slowly, but clearly and
      impressively, the words—“Thou art the man!” and then,
      falling over the side of the chest as if thoroughly satisfied, stretched
      out its limbs quiveringly upon the table.
    

      The scene that ensued is altogether beyond description. The rush for the
      doors and windows was terrific, and many of the most robust men in the
      room fainted outright through sheer horror. But after the first wild,
      shrieking burst of affright, all eyes were directed to Mr. Goodfellow. If
      I live a thousand years, I can never forget the more than mortal agony
      which was depicted in that ghastly face of his, so lately rubicund with
      triumph and wine. For several minutes he sat rigidly as a statue of
      marble; his eyes seeming, in the intense vacancy of their gaze, to be
      turned inward and absorbed in the contemplation of his own miserable,
      murderous soul. At length their expression appeared to flash suddenly out
      into the external world, when, with a quick leap, he sprang from his
      chair, and falling heavily with his head and shoulders upon the table, and
      in contact with the corpse, poured out rapidly and vehemently a detailed
      confession of the hideous crime for which Mr. Pennifeather was then
      imprisoned and doomed to die.
    

      What he recounted was in substance this:—He followed his victim to
      the vicinity of the pool; there shot his horse with a pistol; despatched
      its rider with the butt end; possessed himself of the pocket-book, and,
      supposing the horse dead, dragged it with great labour to the brambles by
      the pond. Upon his own beast he slung the corpse of Mr. Shuttleworthy, and
      thus bore it to a secure place of concealment a long distance off through
      the woods.
    

      The waistcoat, the knife, the pocket-book, and bullet, had been placed by
      himself where found, with the view of avenging himself upon Mr.
      Pennifeather. He had also contrived the discovery of the stained
      handkerchief and shirt.
    

      Towards the end of the blood-churning recital the words of the guilty
      wretch faltered and grew hollow. When the record was finally exhausted, he
      arose, staggered backward from the table, and fell-dead.
    


      The means by which this happily-timed confession was extorted, although
      efficient, were simple indeed. Mr. Goodfellow’s excess of frankness
      had disgusted me, and excited my suspicions from the first. I was present
      when Mr. Pennifeather had struck him, and the fiendish expression which
      then arose upon his countenance, although momentary, assured me that his
      threat of vengeance would, if possible, be rigidly fulfilled. I was thus
      prepared to view the manoeuvering of “Old Charley” in a very
      different light from that in which it was regarded by the good citizens of
      Rattleborough. I saw at once that all the criminating discoveries arose,
      either directly or indirectly, from himself. But the fact which clearly
      opened my eyes to the true state of the case, was the affair of the
      bullet, found by Mr. G. in the carcass of the horse. I had not forgotten,
      although the Rattleburghers had, that there was a hole where the ball had
      entered the horse, and another where it went out. If it were found in the
      animal then, after having made its exit, I saw clearly that it must have
      been deposited by the person who found it. The bloody shirt and
      handkerchief confirmed the idea suggested by the bullet; for the blood on
      examination proved to be capital claret, and no more. When I came to think
      of these things, and also of the late increase of liberality and
      expenditure on the part of Mr. Goodfellow, I entertained a suspicion which
      was none the less strong because I kept it altogether to myself.
    

      In the meantime, I instituted a rigorous private search for the corpse of
      Mr. Shuttleworthy, and, for good reasons, searched in quarters as
      divergent as possible from those to which Mr. Goodfellow conducted his
      party. The result was that, after some days, I came across an old dry
      well, the mouth of which was nearly hidden by brambles; and here, at the
      bottom, I discovered what I sought.
    

      Now it so happened that I had overheard the colloquy between the two
      cronies, when Mr. Goodfellow had contrived to cajole his host into the
      promise of a box of Chateaux-Margaux. Upon this hint I acted. I procured a
      stiff piece of whalebone, thrust it down the throat of the corpse, and
      deposited the latter in an old wine box-taking care so to double the body
      up as to double the whalebone with it. In this manner I had to press
      forcibly upon the lid to keep it down while I secured it with nails; and I
      anticipated, of course, that as soon as these latter were removed, the top
      would fly off and the body up.
    

      Having thus arranged the box, I marked, numbered, and addressed it as
      already told; and then writing a letter in the name of the wine merchants
      with whom Mr. Shuttleworthy dealt, I gave instructions to my servant to
      wheel the box to Mr. Goodfellow’s door, in a barrow, at a given
      signal from myself. For the words which I intended the corpse to speak, I
      confidently depended upon my ventriloquial abilities; for their effect, I
      counted upon the conscience of the murderous wretch.
    

      I believe there is nothing more to be explained. Mr. Pennifeather was
      released upon the spot, inherited the fortune of his uncle, profited by
      the lessons of experience, turned over a new leaf, and led happily ever
      afterward a new life.
    







      WHY THE LITTLE FRENCHMAN WEARS HIS HAND IN A SLING
    

      IT’S on my visiting cards sure enough (and it’s them that’s
      all o’ pink satin paper) that inny gintleman that plases may behould
      the intheristhin words, “Sir Pathrick O’Grandison, Barronitt,
      39 Southampton Row, Russell Square, Parrish o’ Bloomsbury.”
      And shud ye be wantin’ to diskiver who is the pink of purliteness
      quite, and the laider of the hot tun in the houl city o’ Lonon—why
      it’s jist mesilf. And fait that same is no wonder at all at all (so
      be plased to stop curlin your nose), for every inch o’ the six wakes
      that I’ve been a gintleman, and left aff wid the bogthrothing to
      take up wid the Barronissy, it’s Pathrick that’s been living
      like a houly imperor, and gitting the iddication and the graces. Och! and
      wouldn’t it be a blessed thing for your spirrits if ye cud lay your
      two peepers jist, upon Sir Pathrick O’Grandison, Barronitt, when he
      is all riddy drissed for the hopperer, or stipping into the Brisky for the
      drive into the Hyde Park. But it’s the illigant big figgur that I
      ave, for the rason o’ which all the ladies fall in love wid me. Isn’t
      it my own swate silf now that’ll missure the six fut, and the three
      inches more nor that, in me stockins, and that am excadingly will
      proportioned all over to match? And it is ralelly more than three fut and
      a bit that there is, inny how, of the little ould furrener Frinchman that
      lives jist over the way, and that’s a oggling and a goggling the
      houl day, (and bad luck to him,) at the purty widdy Misthress Tracle that’s
      my own nixt-door neighbor, (God bliss her!) and a most particuller frind
      and acquaintance? You percave the little spalpeen is summat down in the
      mouth, and wears his lift hand in a sling, and it’s for that same
      thing, by yur lave, that I’m going to give you the good rason.
    

      The truth of the houl matter is jist simple enough; for the very first day
      that I com’d from Connaught, and showd my swate little silf in the
      strait to the widdy, who was looking through the windy, it was a gone case
      althegither with the heart o’ the purty Misthress Tracle. I percaved
      it, ye see, all at once, and no mistake, and that’s God’s
      truth. First of all it was up wid the windy in a jiffy, and thin she threw
      open her two peepers to the itmost, and thin it was a little gould
      spy-glass that she clapped tight to one o’ them and divil may burn
      me if it didn’t spake to me as plain as a peeper cud spake, and says
      it, through the spy-glass: “Och! the tip o’ the mornin’
      to ye, Sir Pathrick O’Grandison, Barronitt, mavourneen; and it’s
      a nate gintleman that ye are, sure enough, and it’s mesilf and me
      forten jist that’ll be at yur sarvice, dear, inny time o’ day
      at all at all for the asking.” And it’s not mesilf ye wud have
      to be bate in the purliteness; so I made her a bow that wud ha’
      broken yur heart altegither to behould, and thin I pulled aff me hat with
      a flourish, and thin I winked at her hard wid both eyes, as much as to
      say, “True for you, yer a swate little crature, Mrs. Tracle, me
      darlint, and I wish I may be drownthed dead in a bog, if it’s not
      mesilf, Sir Pathrick O’Grandison, Barronitt, that’ll make a
      houl bushel o’ love to yur leddyship, in the twinkling o’ the
      eye of a Londonderry purraty.”
    

      And it was the nixt mornin’, sure, jist as I was making up me mind
      whither it wouldn’t be the purlite thing to sind a bit o’
      writin’ to the widdy by way of a love-litter, when up com’d
      the delivery servant wid an illigant card, and he tould me that the name
      on it (for I niver could rade the copperplate printin on account of being
      lift handed) was all about Mounseer, the Count, A Goose, Look—aisy,
      Maiter-di-dauns, and that the houl of the divilish lingo was the spalpeeny
      long name of the little ould furrener Frinchman as lived over the way.
    

      And jist wid that in cum’d the little willian himself, and then he
      made me a broth of a bow, and thin he said he had ounly taken the liberty
      of doing me the honor of the giving me a call, and thin he went on to
      palaver at a great rate, and divil the bit did I comprehind what he wud be
      afther the tilling me at all at all, excipting and saving that he said
      “pully wou, woolly wou,” and tould me, among a bushel o’
      lies, bad luck to him, that he was mad for the love o’ my widdy
      Misthress Tracle, and that my widdy Mrs. Tracle had a puncheon for him.
    

      At the hearin’ of this, ye may swear, though, I was as mad as a
      grasshopper, but I remimbered that I was Sir Pathrick O’Grandison,
      Barronitt, and that it wasn’t althegither gentaal to lit the anger
      git the upper hand o’ the purliteness, so I made light o’ the
      matter and kipt dark, and got quite sociable wid the little chap, and
      afther a while what did he do but ask me to go wid him to the widdy’s,
      saying he wud give me the feshionable inthroduction to her leddyship.
    

      “Is it there ye are?” said I thin to mesilf, “and it’s
      thrue for you, Pathrick, that ye’re the fortunittest mortal in life.
      We’ll soon see now whither it’s your swate silf, or whither it’s
      little Mounseer Maiter-di-dauns, that Misthress Tracle is head and ears in
      the love wid.”
    

      Wid that we wint aff to the widdy’s, next door, and ye may well say
      it was an illigant place; so it was. There was a carpet all over the
      floor, and in one corner there was a forty-pinny and a Jew’s harp
      and the divil knows what ilse, and in another corner was a sofy, the
      beautifullest thing in all natur, and sitting on the sofy, sure enough,
      there was the swate little angel, Misthress Tracle.
    

      “The tip o’ the mornin’ to ye,” says I, “Mrs.
      Tracle,” and thin I made sich an illigant obaysance that it wud ha
      quite althegither bewildered the brain o’ ye.
    

      “Wully woo, pully woo, plump in the mud,” says the little
      furrenner Frinchman, “and sure Mrs. Tracle,” says he, that he
      did, “isn’t this gintleman here jist his reverence Sir
      Pathrick O’Grandison, Barronitt, and isn’t he althegither and
      entirely the most particular frind and acquaintance that I have in the
      houl world?”
    

      And wid that the widdy, she gits up from the sofy, and makes the swatest
      curthchy nor iver was seen; and thin down she sits like an angel; and
      thin, by the powers, it was that little spalpeen Mounseer Maiter-di-dauns
      that plumped his silf right down by the right side of her. Och hon! I
      ixpicted the two eyes o’ me wud ha cum’d out of my head on the
      spot, I was so dispirate mad! Howiver, “Bait who!” says I,
      after awhile. “Is it there ye are, Mounseer Maiter-di-dauns?”
      and so down I plumped on the lift side of her leddyship, to be aven with
      the willain. Botheration! it wud ha done your heart good to percave the
      illigant double wink that I gived her jist thin right in the face with
      both eyes.
    

      But the little ould Frinchman he niver beginned to suspict me at all at
      all, and disperate hard it was he made the love to her leddyship. “Woully
      wou,” says he, “Pully wou,” says he, “Plump in the
      mud,” says he.
    

      “That’s all to no use, Mounseer Frog, mavourneen,”
      thinks I; and I talked as hard and as fast as I could all the while, and
      throth it was mesilf jist that divarted her leddyship complately and
      intirely, by rason of the illigant conversation that I kipt up wid her all
      about the dear bogs of Connaught. And by and by she gived me such a swate
      smile, from one ind of her mouth to the ither, that it made me as bould as
      a pig, and I jist took hould of the ind of her little finger in the most
      dillikitest manner in natur, looking at her all the while out o’ the
      whites of my eyes.
    

      And then ounly percave the cuteness of the swate angel, for no sooner did
      she obsarve that I was afther the squazing of her flipper, than she up wid
      it in a jiffy, and put it away behind her back, jist as much as to say,
      “Now thin, Sir Pathrick O’Grandison, there’s a bitther
      chance for ye, mavourneen, for it’s not altogether the gentaal thing
      to be afther the squazing of my flipper right full in the sight of that
      little furrenner Frinchman, Mounseer Maiter-di-dauns.”
    

      Wid that I giv’d her a big wink jist to say, “lit Sir Pathrick
      alone for the likes o’ them thricks,” and thin I wint aisy to
      work, and you’d have died wid the divarsion to behould how cliverly
      I slipped my right arm betwane the back o’ the sofy, and the back of
      her leddyship, and there, sure enough, I found a swate little flipper all
      a waiting to say, “the tip o’ the mornin’ to ye, Sir
      Pathrick O’Grandison, Barronitt.” And wasn’t it mesilf,
      sure, that jist giv’d it the laste little bit of a squaze in the
      world, all in the way of a commincement, and not to be too rough wid her
      leddyship? and och, botheration, wasn’t it the gentaalest and
      dilikittest of all the little squazes that I got in return? “Blood
      and thunder, Sir Pathrick, mavourneen,” thinks I to mesilf, “fait
      it’s jist the mother’s son of you, and nobody else at all at
      all, that’s the handsomest and the fortunittest young bog-throtter
      that ever cum’d out of Connaught!” And with that I givd the
      flipper a big squaze, and a big squaze it was, by the powers, that her
      leddyship giv’d to me back. But it would ha split the seven sides of
      you wid the laffin’ to behould, jist then all at once, the consated
      behavior of Mounseer Maiter-di-dauns. The likes o’ sich a jabbering,
      and a smirking, and a parley-wouing as he begin’d wid her leddyship,
      niver was known before upon arth; and divil may burn me if it wasn’t
      me own very two peepers that cotch’d him tipping her the wink out of
      one eye. Och, hon! if it wasn’t mesilf thin that was mad as a
      Kilkenny cat I shud like to be tould who it was!
    

      “Let me infarm you, Mounseer Maiter-di-dauns,” said I, as
      purlite as iver ye seed, “that it’s not the gintaal thing at
      all at all, and not for the likes o’ you inny how, to be afther the
      oggling and a goggling at her leddyship in that fashion,” and jist
      wid that such another squaze as it was I giv’d her flipper, all as
      much as to say, “isn’t it Sir Pathrick now, my jewel, that’ll
      be able to the proticting o’ you, my darlint?” and then there
      cum’d another squaze back, all by way of the answer. “Thrue
      for you, Sir Pathrick,” it said as plain as iver a squaze said in
      the world, “Thrue for you, Sir Pathrick, mavourneen, and it’s
      a proper nate gintleman ye are—that’s God’s truth,”
      and with that she opened her two beautiful peepers till I belaved they wud
      ha’ cum’d out of her hid althegither and intirely, and she
      looked first as mad as a cat at Mounseer Frog, and thin as smiling as all
      out o’ doors at mesilf.
    

      “Thin,” says he, the willian, “Och hon! and a wolly-wou,
      pully-wou,” and then wid that he shoved up his two shoulders till
      the divil the bit of his hid was to be diskivered, and then he let down
      the two corners of his purraty-trap, and thin not a haporth more of the
      satisfaction could I git out o’ the spalpeen.
    

      Belave me, my jewel, it was Sir Pathrick that was unreasonable mad thin,
      and the more by token that the Frinchman kipt an wid his winking at the
      widdy; and the widdy she kept an wid the squazing of my flipper, as much
      as to say, “At him again, Sir Pathrick O’Grandison,
      mavourneen:” so I just ripped out wid a big oath, and says I;
    

      “Ye little spalpeeny frog of a bog-throtting son of a bloody noun!”—and
      jist thin what d’ye think it was that her leddyship did? Troth she
      jumped up from the sofy as if she was bit, and made off through the door,
      while I turned my head round afther her, in a complate bewilderment and
      botheration, and followed her wid me two peepers. You percave I had a
      reason of my own for knowing that she couldn’t git down the stares
      althegither and intirely; for I knew very well that I had hould of her
      hand, for the divil the bit had I iver lit it go. And says I; “Isn’t
      it the laste little bit of a mistake in the world that ye’ve been
      afther the making, yer leddyship? Come back now, that’s a darlint,
      and I’ll give ye yur flipper.” But aff she wint down the
      stairs like a shot, and thin I turned round to the little Frinch
      furrenner. Och hon! if it wasn’t his spalpeeny little paw that I had
      hould of in my own—why thin—thin it wasn’t—that’s
      all.
    

      And maybe it wasn’t mesilf that jist died then outright wid the
      laffin’, to behold the little chap when he found out that it wasn’t
      the widdy at all at all that he had had hould of all the time, but only
      Sir Pathrick O’Grandison. The ould divil himself niver behild sich a
      long face as he pet an! As for Sir Pathrick O’Grandison, Barronitt,
      it wasn’t for the likes of his riverence to be afther the minding of
      a thrifle of a mistake. Ye may jist say, though (for it’s God’s
      thruth), that afore I left hould of the flipper of the spalpeen (which was
      not till afther her leddyship’s futman had kicked us both down the
      stairs), I giv’d it such a nate little broth of a squaze as made it
      all up into raspberry jam.
    

      “Woully wou,” says he, “pully wou,” says he—“Cot
      tam!”
    

      And that’s jist the thruth of the rason why he wears his lift hand
      in a sling.
    

      BON-BON.
    

          Quand un bon vin meuble mon estomac,
          Je suis plus savant que Balzac—          Plus sage que Pibrac;
          Mon brass seul faisant l’attaque
          De la nation Coseaque,
          La mettroit au sac;
          De Charon je passerois le lac,
          En dormant dans son bac;
          J’irois au fier Eac,
          Sans que mon coeur fit tic ni tac,
          Pr?senter du tabac.
                      French Vaudeville


      THAT Pierre Bon-Bon was a restaurateur of uncommon qualifications,
      no man who, during the reign of——, frequented the little C?f?
      in the cul-de-sac Le Febvre at Rouen, will, I imagine, feel himself at
      liberty to dispute. That Pierre Bon-Bon was, in an equal degree, skilled
      in the philosophy of that period is, I presume, still more especially
      undeniable. His pat?s ? la fois were beyond doubt immaculate; but
      what pen can do justice to his essays sur la Nature—his
      thoughts sur l’Ame—his observations sur l’Esprit?
      If his omelettes—if his fricandeaux were inestimable,
      what litt?rateur of that day would not have given twice as much for
      an “Id?e de Bon-Bon” as for all the trash of “Id?es”
      of all the rest of the savants? Bon-Bon had ransacked libraries
      which no other man had ransacked—had more than any other would have
      entertained a notion of reading—had understood more than any other
      would have conceived the possibility of understanding; and although, while
      he flourished, there were not wanting some authors at Rouen to assert
      “that his dicta evinced neither the purity of the Academy,
      nor the depth of the Lyceum”—although, mark me, his doctrines
      were by no means very generally comprehended, still it did not follow that
      they were difficult of comprehension. It was, I think, on account of their
      self-evidency that many persons were led to consider them abstruse. It is
      to Bon-Bon—but let this go no farther—it is to Bon-Bon that
      Kant himself is mainly indebted for his metaphysics. The former was indeed
      not a Platonist, nor strictly speaking an Aristotelian—nor did he,
      like the modern Leibnitz, waste those precious hours which might be
      employed in the invention of a fricas?e or, facili gradu,
      the analysis of a sensation, in frivolous attempts at reconciling the
      obstinate oils and waters of ethical discussion. Not at all. Bon-Bon was
      Ionic—Bon-Bon was equally Italic. He reasoned ? priori—He
      reasoned also ? posteriori. His ideas were innate—or
      otherwise. He believed in George of Trebizonde—He believed in
      Bossarion [Bessarion]. Bon-Bon was emphatically a—Bon-Bonist.
    

      I have spoken of the philosopher in his capacity of restaurateur. I
      would not, however, have any friend of mine imagine that, in fulfilling
      his hereditary duties in that line, our hero wanted a proper estimation of
      their dignity and importance. Far from it. It was impossible to say in
      which branch of his profession he took the greater pride. In his opinion
      the powers of the intellect held intimate connection with the capabilities
      of the stomach. I am not sure, indeed, that he greatly disagreed with the
      Chinese, who held that the soul lies in the abdomen. The Greeks at all
      events were right, he thought, who employed the same words for the mind
      and the diaphragm. (*1) By this I do not mean to insinuate a charge of
      gluttony, or indeed any other serious charge to the prejudice of the
      metaphysician. If Pierre Bon-Bon had his failings—and what great man
      has not a thousand?—if Pierre Bon-Bon, I say, had his failings, they
      were failings of very little importance—faults indeed which, in
      other tempers, have often been looked upon rather in the light of virtues.
      As regards one of these foibles, I should not even have mentioned it in
      this history but for the remarkable prominency—the extreme alto
      relievo—in which it jutted out from the plane of his general
      disposition. He could never let slip an opportunity of making a bargain.
    

     {*1} MD


      Not that he was avaricious—no. It was by no means necessary to the
      satisfaction of the philosopher, that the bargain should be to his own
      proper advantage. Provided a trade could be effected—a trade of any
      kind, upon any terms, or under any circumstances—a triumphant smile
      was seen for many days thereafter to enlighten his countenance, and a
      knowing wink of the eye to give evidence of his sagacity.
    

      At any epoch it would not be very wonderful if a humor so peculiar as the
      one I have just mentioned, should elicit attention and remark. At the
      epoch of our narrative, had this peculiarity not attracted observation,
      there would have been room for wonder indeed. It was soon reported that,
      upon all occasions of the kind, the smile of Bon-Bon was wont to differ
      widely from the downright grin with which he would laugh at his own jokes,
      or welcome an acquaintance. Hints were thrown out of an exciting nature;
      stories were told of perilous bargains made in a hurry and repented of at
      leisure; and instances were adduced of unaccountable capacities, vague
      longings, and unnatural inclinations implanted by the author of all evil
      for wise purposes of his own.
    

      The philosopher had other weaknesses—but they are scarcely worthy
      our serious examination. For example, there are few men of extraordinary
      profundity who are found wanting in an inclination for the bottle. Whether
      this inclination be an exciting cause, or rather a valid proof of such
      profundity, it is a nice thing to say. Bon-Bon, as far as I can learn, did
      not think the subject adapted to minute investigation;—nor do I. Yet
      in the indulgence of a propensity so truly classical, it is not to be
      supposed that the restaurateur would lose sight of that intuitive
      discrimination which was wont to characterize, at one and the same time,
      his essais and his omelettes. In his seclusions the Vin de Bourgogne had
      its allotted hour, and there were appropriate moments for the Cotes du
      Rhone. With him Sauterne was to Medoc what Catullus was to Homer. He would
      sport with a syllogism in sipping St. Peray, but unravel an argument over
      Clos de Vougeot, and upset a theory in a torrent of Chambertin. Well had
      it been if the same quick sense of propriety had attended him in the
      peddling propensity to which I have formerly alluded—but this was by
      no means the case. Indeed to say the truth, that trait of mind in the
      philosophic Bon-Bon did begin at length to assume a character of strange
      intensity and mysticism, and appeared deeply tinctured with the diablerie
      of his favorite German studies.
    

      To enter the little Cafe in the cul-de-sac Le Febvre was, at the period of
      our tale, to enter the sanctum of a man of genius. Bon-Bon was a man of
      genius. There was not a sous-cusinier in Rouen, who could not have told
      you that Bon-Bon was a man of genius. His very cat knew it, and forebore
      to whisk her tail in the presence of the man of genius. His large
      water-dog was acquainted with the fact, and upon the approach of his
      master, betrayed his sense of inferiority by a sanctity of deportment, a
      debasement of the ears, and a dropping of the lower jaw not altogether
      unworthy of a dog. It is, however, true that much of this habitual respect
      might have been attributed to the personal appearance of the
      metaphysician. A distinguished exterior will, I am constrained to say,
      have its way even with a beast; and I am willing to allow much in the
      outward man of the restaurateur calculated to impress the imagination of
      the quadruped. There is a peculiar majesty about the atmosphere of the
      little great—if I may be permitted so equivocal an expression—which
      mere physical bulk alone will be found at all times inefficient in
      creating. If, however, Bon-Bon was barely three feet in height, and if his
      head was diminutively small, still it was impossible to behold the
      rotundity of his stomach without a sense of magnificence nearly bordering
      upon the sublime. In its size both dogs and men must have seen a type of
      his acquirements—in its immensity a fitting habitation for his
      immortal soul.
    

      I might here—if it so pleased me—dilate upon the matter of
      habiliment, and other mere circumstances of the external metaphysician. I
      might hint that the hair of our hero was worn short, combed smoothly over
      his forehead, and surmounted by a conical-shaped white flannel cap and
      tassels—that his pea-green jerkin was not after the fashion of those
      worn by the common class of restaurateurs at that day—that the
      sleeves were something fuller than the reigning costume permitted—that
      the cuffs were turned up, not as usual in that barbarous period, with
      cloth of the same quality and color as the garment, but faced in a more
      fanciful manner with the particolored velvet of Genoa—that his
      slippers were of a bright purple, curiously filigreed, and might have been
      manufactured in Japan, but for the exquisite pointing of the toes, and the
      brilliant tints of the binding and embroidery—that his breeches were
      of the yellow satin-like material called aimable—that his sky-blue
      cloak, resembling in form a dressing-wrapper, and richly bestudded all
      over with crimson devices, floated cavalierly upon his shoulders like a
      mist of the morning—and that his tout ensemble gave rise to the
      remarkable words of Benevenuta, the Improvisatrice of Florence, “that
      it was difficult to say whether Pierre Bon-Bon was indeed a bird of
      Paradise, or rather a very Paradise of perfection.” I might, I say,
      expatiate upon all these points if I pleased,—but I forbear, merely
      personal details may be left to historical novelists,—they are
      beneath the moral dignity of matter-of-fact.
    

      I have said that “to enter the Cafe in the cul-de-sac Le Febvre was
      to enter the sanctum of a man of genius”—but then it was only
      the man of genius who could duly estimate the merits of the sanctum. A
      sign, consisting of a vast folio, swung before the entrance. On one side
      of the volume was painted a bottle; on the reverse a pate. On the back
      were visible in large letters Oeuvres de Bon-Bon. Thus was delicately
      shadowed forth the two-fold occupation of the proprietor.
    

      Upon stepping over the threshold, the whole interior of the building
      presented itself to view. A long, low-pitched room, of antique
      construction, was indeed all the accommodation afforded by the Cafe. In a
      corner of the apartment stood the bed of the metaphysician. An army of
      curtains, together with a canopy a la Grecque, gave it an air at once
      classic and comfortable. In the corner diagonary opposite, appeared, in
      direct family communion, the properties of the kitchen and the
      bibliotheque. A dish of polemics stood peacefully upon the dresser. Here
      lay an ovenful of the latest ethics—there a kettle of dudecimo
      melanges. Volumes of German morality were hand and glove with the gridiron—a
      toasting-fork might be discovered by the side of Eusebius—Plato
      reclined at his ease in the frying-pan—and contemporary manuscripts
      were filed away upon the spit.
    

      In other respects the Cafe de Bon-Bon might be said to differ little from
      the usual restaurants of the period. A fireplace yawned opposite the door.
      On the right of the fireplace an open cupboard displayed a formidable
      array of labelled bottles.
    

      It was here, about twelve o’clock one night during the severe winter
      the comments of his neighbours upon his singular propensity—that
      Pierre Bon-Bon, I say, having turned them all out of his house, locked the
      door upon them with an oath, and betook himself in no very pacific mood to
      the comforts of a leather-bottomed arm-chair, and a fire of blazing
      fagots.
    

      It was one of those terrific nights which are only met with once or twice
      during a century. It snowed fiercely, and the house tottered to its centre
      with the floods of wind that, rushing through the crannies in the wall,
      and pouring impetuously down the chimney, shook awfully the curtains of
      the philosopher’s bed, and disorganized the economy of his pate-pans
      and papers. The huge folio sign that swung without, exposed to the fury of
      the tempest, creaked ominously, and gave out a moaning sound from its
      stanchions of solid oak.
    

      It was in no placid temper, I say, that the metaphysician drew up his
      chair to its customary station by the hearth. Many circumstances of a
      perplexing nature had occurred during the day, to disturb the serenity of
      his meditations. In attempting des oeufs a la Princesse, he had
      unfortunately perpetrated an omelette a la Reine; the discovery of a
      principle in ethics had been frustrated by the overturning of a stew; and
      last, not least, he had been thwarted in one of those admirable bargains
      which he at all times took such especial delight in bringing to a
      successful termination. But in the chafing of his mind at these
      unaccountable vicissitudes, there did not fail to be mingled some degree
      of that nervous anxiety which the fury of a boisterous night is so well
      calculated to produce. Whistling to his more immediate vicinity the large
      black water-dog we have spoken of before, and settling himself uneasily in
      his chair, he could not help casting a wary and unquiet eye toward those
      distant recesses of the apartment whose inexorable shadows not even the
      red firelight itself could more than partially succeed in overcoming.
      Having completed a scrutiny whose exact purpose was perhaps unintelligible
      to himself, he drew close to his seat a small table covered with books and
      papers, and soon became absorbed in the task of retouching a voluminous
      manuscript, intended for publication on the morrow.
    

      He had been thus occupied for some minutes when “I am in no hurry,
      Monsieur Bon-Bon,” suddenly whispered a whining voice in the
      apartment.
    

      “The devil!” ejaculated our hero, starting to his feet,
      overturning the table at his side, and staring around him in astonishment.
    

      “Very true,” calmly replied the voice.
    

      “Very true!—what is very true?—how came you here?”
      vociferated the metaphysician, as his eye fell upon something which lay
      stretched at full length upon the bed.
    

      “I was saying,” said the intruder, without attending to the
      interrogatives,—“I was saying that I am not at all pushed for
      time—that the business upon which I took the liberty of calling, is
      of no pressing importance—in short, that I can very well wait until
      you have finished your Exposition.”
    

      “My Exposition!—there now!—how do you know?—how
      came you to understand that I was writing an Exposition?—good God!”
    

      “Hush!” replied the figure, in a shrill undertone; and,
      arising quickly from the bed, he made a single step toward our hero, while
      an iron lamp that depended over-head swung convulsively back from his
      approach.
    

      The philosopher’s amazement did not prevent a narrow scrutiny of the
      stranger’s dress and appearance. The outlines of his figure,
      exceedingly lean, but much above the common height, were rendered minutely
      distinct, by means of a faded suit of black cloth which fitted tight to
      the skin, but was otherwise cut very much in the style of a century ago.
      These garments had evidently been intended for a much shorter person than
      their present owner. His ankles and wrists were left naked for several
      inches. In his shoes, however, a pair of very brilliant buckles gave the
      lie to the extreme poverty implied by the other portions of his dress. His
      head was bare, and entirely bald, with the exception of a hinder part,
      from which depended a queue of considerable length. A pair of green
      spectacles, with side glasses, protected his eyes from the influence of
      the light, and at the same time prevented our hero from ascertaining
      either their color or their conformation. About the entire person there
      was no evidence of a shirt, but a white cravat, of filthy appearance, was
      tied with extreme precision around the throat and the ends hanging down
      formally side by side gave (although I dare say unintentionally) the idea
      of an ecclesiastic. Indeed, many other points both in his appearance and
      demeanor might have very well sustained a conception of that nature. Over
      his left ear, he carried, after the fashion of a modern clerk, an
      instrument resembling the stylus of the ancients. In a breast-pocket of
      his coat appeared conspicuously a small black volume fastened with clasps
      of steel. This book, whether accidentally or not, was so turned outwardly
      from the person as to discover the words “Rituel Catholique”
      in white letters upon the back. His entire physiognomy was interestingly
      saturnine—even cadaverously pale. The forehead was lofty, and deeply
      furrowed with the ridges of contemplation. The corners of the mouth were
      drawn down into an expression of the most submissive humility. There was
      also a clasping of the hands, as he stepped toward our hero—a deep
      sigh—and altogether a look of such utter sanctity as could not have
      failed to be unequivocally preposessing. Every shadow of anger faded from
      the countenance of the metaphysician, as, having completed a satisfactory
      survey of his visiter’s person, he shook him cordially by the hand,
      and conducted him to a seat.
    

      There would however be a radical error in attributing this instantaneous
      transition of feeling in the philosopher, to any one of those causes which
      might naturally be supposed to have had an influence. Indeed, Pierre
      Bon-Bon, from what I have been able to understand of his disposition, was
      of all men the least likely to be imposed upon by any speciousness of
      exterior deportment. It was impossible that so accurate an observer of men
      and things should have failed to discover, upon the moment, the real
      character of the personage who had thus intruded upon his hospitality. To
      say no more, the conformation of his visiter’s feet was sufficiently
      remarkable—he maintained lightly upon his head an inordinately tall
      hat—there was a tremulous swelling about the hinder part of his
      breeches—and the vibration of his coat tail was a palpable fact.
      Judge, then, with what feelings of satisfaction our hero found himself
      thrown thus at once into the society of a person for whom he had at all
      times entertained the most unqualified respect. He was, however, too much
      of the diplomatist to let escape him any intimation of his suspicions in
      regard to the true state of affairs. It was not his cue to appear at all
      conscious of the high honor he thus unexpectedly enjoyed; but, by leading
      his guest into the conversation, to elicit some important ethical ideas,
      which might, in obtaining a place in his contemplated publication,
      enlighten the human race, and at the same time immortalize himself—ideas
      which, I should have added, his visitor’s great age, and well-known
      proficiency in the science of morals, might very well have enabled him to
      afford.
    

      Actuated by these enlightened views, our hero bade the gentleman sit down,
      while he himself took occasion to throw some fagots upon the fire, and
      place upon the now re-established table some bottles of Mousseux. Having
      quickly completed these operations, he drew his chair vis-a-vis to his
      companion’s, and waited until the latter should open the
      conversation. But plans even the most skilfully matured are often thwarted
      in the outset of their application—and the restaurateur found
      himself nonplussed by the very first words of his visiter’s speech.
    

      “I see you know me, Bon-Bon,” said he; “ha! ha! ha!—he!
      he! he!—hi! hi! hi!—ho! ho! ho!—hu! hu! hu!”—and
      the devil, dropping at once the sanctity of his demeanor, opened to its
      fullest extent a mouth from ear to ear, so as to display a set of jagged
      and fang-like teeth, and, throwing back his head, laughed long, loudly,
      wickedly, and uproariously, while the black dog, crouching down upon his
      haunches, joined lustily in the chorus, and the tabby cat, flying off at a
      tangent, stood up on end, and shrieked in the farthest corner of the
      apartment.
    

      Not so the philosopher; he was too much a man of the world either to laugh
      like the dog, or by shrieks to betray the indecorous trepidation of the
      cat. It must be confessed, he felt a little astonishment to see the white
      letters which formed the words “Rituel Catholique” on the book
      in his guest’s pocket, momently changing both their color and their
      import, and in a few seconds, in place of the original title the words
      Regitre des Condamnes blazed forth in characters of red. This startling
      circumstance, when Bon-Bon replied to his visiter’s remark, imparted
      to his manner an air of embarrassment which probably might, not otherwise
      have been observed.
    

      “Why sir,” said the philosopher, “why sir, to speak
      sincerely—I I imagine—I have some faint—some very faint
      idea—of the remarkable honor-”
    

      “Oh!—ah!—yes!—very well!” interrupted his
      Majesty; “say no more—I see how it is.” And hereupon,
      taking off his green spectacles, he wiped the glasses carefully with the
      sleeve of his coat, and deposited them in his pocket.
    

      If Bon-Bon had been astonished at the incident of the book, his amazement
      was now much increased by the spectacle which here presented itself to
      view. In raising his eyes, with a strong feeling of curiosity to ascertain
      the color of his guest’s, he found them by no means black, as he had
      anticipated—nor gray, as might have been imagined—nor yet
      hazel nor blue—nor indeed yellow nor red—nor purple—nor
      white—nor green—nor any other color in the heavens above, or
      in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth. In short, Pierre
      Bon-Bon not only saw plainly that his Majesty had no eyes whatsoever, but
      could discover no indications of their having existed at any previous
      period—for the space where eyes should naturally have been was, I am
      constrained to say, simply a dead level of flesh.
    

      It was not in the nature of the metaphysician to forbear making some
      inquiry into the sources of so strange a phenomenon, and the reply of his
      Majesty was at once prompt, dignified, and satisfactory.
    

      “Eyes! my dear Bon-Bon—eyes! did you say?—oh!—ah!—I
      perceive! The ridiculous prints, eh, which are in, circulation, have given
      you a false idea of my personal appearance? Eyes!—true. Eyes, Pierre
      Bon-Bon, are very well in their proper place—that, you would say, is
      the head?—right—the head of a worm. To you, likewise, these
      optics are indispensable—yet I will convince you that my vision is
      more penetrating than your own. There is a cat I see in the corner—a
      pretty cat—look at her—observe her well. Now, Bon-Bon, do you
      behold the thoughts—the thoughts, I say,—the ideas—the
      reflections—which are being engendered in her pericranium? There it
      is, now—you do not! She is thinking we admire the length of her tail
      and the profundity of her mind. She has just concluded that I am the most
      distinguished of ecclesiastics, and that you are the most superficial of
      metaphysicians. Thus you see I am not altogether blind; but to one of my
      profession, the eyes you speak of would be merely an incumbrance, liable
      at any time to be put out by a toasting-iron, or a pitchfork. To you, I
      allow, these optical affairs are indispensable. Endeavor, Bon-Bon, to use
      them well;—my vision is the soul.”
    

      Hereupon the guest helped himself to the wine upon the table, and pouring
      out a bumper for Bon-Bon, requested him to drink it without scruple, and
      make himself perfectly at home.
    

      “A clever book that of yours, Pierre,” resumed his Majesty,
      tapping our friend knowingly upon the shoulder, as the latter put down his
      glass after a thorough compliance with his visiter’s injunction.
      “A clever book that of yours, upon my honor. It’s a work after
      my own heart. Your arrangement of the matter, I think, however, might be
      improved, and many of your notions remind me of Aristotle. That
      philosopher was one of my most intimate acquaintances. I liked him as much
      for his terrible ill temper, as for his happy knack at making a blunder.
      There is only one solid truth in all that he has written, and for that I
      gave him the hint out of pure compassion for his absurdity. I suppose,
      Pierre Bon-Bon, you very well know to what divine moral truth I am
      alluding?”
    

      “Cannot say that I—”
    

      “Indeed!—why it was I who told Aristotle that by sneezing, men
      expelled superfluous ideas through the proboscis.”
    

      “Which is—hiccup!—undoubtedly the case,” said the
      metaphysician, while he poured out for himself another bumper of Mousseux,
      and offered his snuff-box to the fingers of his visiter.
    

      “There was Plato, too,” continued his Majesty, modestly
      declining the snuff-box and the compliment it implied—“there
      was Plato, too, for whom I, at one time, felt all the affection of a
      friend. You knew Plato, Bon-Bon?—ah, no, I beg a thousand pardons.
      He met me at Athens, one day, in the Parthenon, and told me he was
      distressed for an idea. I bade him write, down that o nous estin aulos. He
      said that he would do so, and went home, while I stepped over to the
      pyramids. But my conscience smote me for having uttered a truth, even to
      aid a friend, and hastening back to Athens, I arrived behind the
      philosopher’s chair as he was inditing the ‘aulos.’”
    

      “Giving the lambda a fillip with my finger, I turned it upside down.
      So the sentence now read ‘o nous estin augos’, and is, you
      perceive, the fundamental doctrines in his metaphysics.”
    

      “Were you ever at Rome?” asked the restaurateur, as he
      finished his second bottle of Mousseux, and drew from the closet a larger
      supply of Chambertin.
    

      “But once, Monsieur Bon-Bon, but once. There was a time,” said
      the devil, as if reciting some passage from a book—“there was
      a time when occurred an anarchy of five years, during which the republic,
      bereft of all its officers, had no magistracy besides the tribunes of the
      people, and these were not legally vested with any degree of executive
      power—at that time, Monsieur Bon-Bon—at that time only I was
      in Rome, and I have no earthly acquaintance, consequently, with any of its
      philosophy.” (*2)
    

     {*2} Ils ecrivaient sur la Philosophie (Cicero, Lucretius,
     Seneca) mais c’etait la Philosophie Grecque.—Condorcet.


      “What do you think of—what do you think of—hiccup!—Epicurus?”
    

      “What do I think of whom?” said the devil, in astonishment,
      “you cannot surely mean to find any fault with Epicurus! What do I
      think of Epicurus! Do you mean me, sir?—I am Epicurus! I am the same
      philosopher who wrote each of the three hundred treatises commemorated by
      Diogenes Laertes.”
    

      “That’s a lie!” said the metaphysician, for the wine had
      gotten a little into his head.
    

      “Very well!—very well, sir!—very well, indeed, sir!”
      said his Majesty, apparently much flattered.
    

      “That’s a lie!” repeated the restaurateur, dogmatically;
      “that’s a—hiccup!—a lie!”
    

      “Well, well, have it your own way!” said the devil,
      pacifically, and Bon-Bon, having beaten his Majesty at argument, thought
      it his duty to conclude a second bottle of Chambertin.
    

      “As I was saying,” resumed the visiter—“as I was
      observing a little while ago, there are some very outre notions in that
      book of yours Monsieur Bon-Bon. What, for instance, do you mean by all
      that humbug about the soul? Pray, sir, what is the soul?”
    

      “The—hiccup!—soul,” replied the metaphysician,
      referring to his MS., “is undoubtedly-”
    

      “No, sir!”
    

      “Indubitably-”
    

      “No, sir!”
    

      “Indisputably-”
    

      “No, sir!”
    

      “Evidently-”
    

      “No, sir!”
    

      “Incontrovertibly-”
    

      “No, sir!”
    

      “Hiccup!—”
    

      “No, sir!”
    

      “And beyond all question, a-”
    

      “No sir, the soul is no such thing!” (Here the philosopher,
      looking daggers, took occasion to make an end, upon the spot, of his third
      bottle of Chambertin.)
    

      “Then—hic-cup!—pray, sir—what—what is it?”
    

      “That is neither here nor there, Monsieur Bon-Bon,” replied
      his Majesty, musingly. “I have tasted—that is to say, I have
      known some very bad souls, and some too—pretty good ones.”
      Here he smacked his lips, and, having unconsciously let fall his hand upon
      the volume in his pocket, was seized with a violent fit of sneezing.
    

      He continued.
    

      “There was the soul of Cratinus—passable: Aristophanes—racy:
      Plato—exquisite—not your Plato, but Plato the comic poet; your
      Plato would have turned the stomach of Cerberus—faugh! Then let me
      see! there were Naevius, and Andronicus, and Plautus, and Terentius. Then
      there were Lucilius, and Catullus, and Naso, and Quintus Flaccus,—dear
      Quinty! as I called him when he sung a seculare for my amusement, while I
      toasted him, in pure good humor, on a fork. But they want flavor, these
      Romans. One fat Greek is worth a dozen of them, and besides will keep,
      which cannot be said of a Quirite.—Let us taste your Sauterne.”
    

      Bon-Bon had by this time made up his mind to nil admirari and endeavored
      to hand down the bottles in question. He was, however, conscious of a
      strange sound in the room like the wagging of a tail. Of this, although
      extremely indecent in his Majesty, the philosopher took no notice:—simply
      kicking the dog, and requesting him to be quiet. The visiter continued:
    

      “I found that Horace tasted very much like Aristotle;—you know
      I am fond of variety. Terentius I could not have told from Menander. Naso,
      to my astonishment, was Nicander in disguise. Virgilius had a strong twang
      of Theocritus. Martial put me much in mind of Archilochus—and Titus
      Livius was positively Polybius and none other.”
    

      “Hic-cup!” here replied Bon-Bon, and his majesty proceeded:
    

      “But if I have a penchant, Monsieur Bon-Bon—if I have a
      penchant, it is for a philosopher. Yet, let me tell you, sir, it is not
      every dev—I mean it is not every gentleman who knows how to choose a
      philosopher. Long ones are not good; and the best, if not carefully
      shelled, are apt to be a little rancid on account of the gall!”
    

      “Shelled!”
    

      “I mean taken out of the carcass.”
    

      “What do you think of a—hic-cup!—physician?”
    

      “Don’t mention them!—ugh! ugh! ugh!” (Here his
      Majesty retched violently.) “I never tasted but one—that
      rascal Hippocrates!—smelt of asafoetida—ugh! ugh! ugh!—caught
      a wretched cold washing him in the Styx—and after all he gave me the
      cholera morbus.”
    

      “The—hiccup—wretch!” ejaculated Bon-Bon, “the—hic-cup!—absorption
      of a pill-box!”—and the philosopher dropped a tear.
    

      “After all,” continued the visiter, “after all, if a dev—if
      a gentleman wishes to live, he must have more talents than one or two; and
      with us a fat face is an evidence of diplomacy.”
    

      “How so?”
    

      “Why, we are sometimes exceedingly pushed for provisions. You must
      know that, in a climate so sultry as mine, it is frequently impossible to
      keep a spirit alive for more than two or three hours; and after death,
      unless pickled immediately (and a pickled spirit is not good), they will—smell—you
      understand, eh? Putrefaction is always to be apprehended when the souls
      are consigned to us in the usual way.”
    

      “Hiccup!—hiccup!—good God! how do you manage?”
    

      Here the iron lamp commenced swinging with redoubled violence, and the
      devil half started from his seat;—however, with a slight sigh, he
      recovered his composure, merely saying to our hero in a low tone: “I
      tell you what, Pierre Bon-Bon, we must have no more swearing.”
    

      The host swallowed another bumper, by way of denoting thorough
      comprehension and acquiescence, and the visiter continued.
    

      “Why, there are several ways of managing. The most of us starve:
      some put up with the pickle: for my part I purchase my spirits vivente
      corpore, in which case I find they keep very well.”
    

      “But the body!—hiccup!—the body!”
    

      “The body, the body—well, what of the body?—oh! ah! I
      perceive. Why, sir, the body is not at all affected by the transaction. I
      have made innumerable purchases of the kind in my day, and the parties
      never experienced any inconvenience. There were Cain and Nimrod, and Nero,
      and Caligula, and Dionysius, and Pisistratus, and—and a thousand
      others, who never knew what it was to have a soul during the latter part
      of their lives; yet, sir, these men adorned society. Why possession of his
      faculties, mental and corporeal? Who writes a keener epigram? Who reasons
      more wittily? Who—but stay! I have his agreement in my pocket-book.”
    

      Thus saying, he produced a red leather wallet, and took from it a number
      of papers. Upon some of these Bon-Bon caught a glimpse of the letters
      Machi—Maza—Robesp—with the words Caligula, George,
      Elizabeth. His Majesty selected a narrow slip of parchment, and from it
      read aloud the following words:
    

      “In consideration of certain mental endowments which it is
      unnecessary to specify, and in further consideration of one thousand louis
      d’or, I being aged one year and one month, do hereby make over to
      the bearer of this agreement all my right, title, and appurtenance in the
      shadow called my soul. (Signed) A....” {*4} (Here His Majesty
      repeated a name which I did not feel justified in indicating more
      unequivocally.)
    

      {*4} Quere-Arouet?
    

      “A clever fellow that,” resumed he; “but like you,
      Monsieur Bon-Bon, he was mistaken about the soul. The soul a shadow,
      truly! The soul a shadow; Ha! ha! ha!—he! he! he!—hu! hu! hu!
      Only think of a fricasseed shadow!”
    

      “Only think—hiccup!—of a fricasseed shadow!”
      exclaimed our hero, whose faculties were becoming much illuminated by the
      profundity of his Majesty’s discourse.
    

      “Only think of a hiccup!—fricasseed shadow!! Now, damme!—hiccup!—humph!
      If I would have been such a—hiccup!—nincompoop! My soul, Mr.—humph!”
    

      “Your soul, Monsieur Bon-Bon?”
    

      “Yes, sir—hiccup!—my soul is-”
    

      “What, sir?”
    

      “No shadow, damme!”
    

      “Did you mean to say-”
    

      “Yes, sir, my soul is—hiccup!—humph!—yes, sir.”
    

      “Did you not intend to assert-”
    

      “My soul is—hiccup!—peculiarly qualified for—hiccup!—a-”
    

      “What, sir?”
    

      “Stew.”
    

      “Ha!”
    

      “Soufflee.”
    

      “Eh!”
    

      “Fricassee.”
    

      “Indeed!”
    

      “Ragout and fricandeau—and see here, my good fellow! I’ll
      let you have it—hiccup!—a bargain.” Here the philosopher
      slapped his Majesty upon the back.
    

      “Couldn’t think of such a thing,” said the latter
      calmly, at the same time rising from his seat. The metaphysician stared.
    

      “Am supplied at present,” said his Majesty.
    

      “Hiccup—e-h?” said the philosopher.
    

      “Have no funds on hand.”
    

      “What?”
    

      “Besides, very unhandsome in me—”
    

      “Sir!”
    

      “To take advantage of-”
    

      “Hiccup!”
    

      “Your present disgusting and ungentlemanly situation.”
    

      Here the visiter bowed and withdrew—in what manner could not
      precisely be ascertained—but in a well-concerted effort to discharge
      a bottle at “the villain,” the slender chain was severed that
      depended from the ceiling, and the metaphysician prostrated by the
      downfall of the lamp.