THREE AND—AN EXTRA.
    

   “When halter and heel ropes are slipped, do not give chase with
   sticks but with gram.” —Punjabi Proverb.


      After marriage arrives a reaction, sometimes a big, sometimes a little
      one; but it comes sooner or later, and must be tided over by both parties
      if they desire the rest of their lives to go with the current.
    

      In the case of the Cusack-Bremmils this reaction did not set in till the
      third year after the wedding. Bremmil was hard to hold at the best of
      times; but he was a beautiful husband until the baby died and Mrs. Bremmil
      wore black, and grew thin, and mourned as if the bottom of the universe
      had fallen out. Perhaps Bremmil ought to have comforted her. He tried to
      do so, I think; but the more he comforted the more Mrs. Bremmil grieved,
      and, consequently, the more uncomfortable Bremmil grew. The fact was that
      they both needed a tonic. And they got it. Mrs. Bremmil can afford to
      laugh now, but it was no laughing matter to her at the time.
    

      You see, Mrs. Hauksbee appeared on the horizon; and where she existed was
      fair chance of trouble. At Simla her bye-name was the “Stormy Petrel.” She
      had won that title five times to my own certain knowledge. She was a
      little, brown, thin, almost skinny, woman, with big, rolling, violet-blue
      eyes, and the sweetest manners in the world. You had only to mention her
      name at afternoon teas for every woman in the room to rise up, and call
      her—well—NOT blessed. She was clever, witty, brilliant, and
      sparkling beyond most of her kind; but possessed of many devils of malice
      and mischievousness. She could be nice, though, even to her own sex. But
      that is another story.
    

      Bremmil went off at score after the baby's death and the general
      discomfort that followed, and Mrs. Hauksbee annexed him. She took no
      pleasure in hiding her captives. She annexed him publicly, and saw that
      the public saw it. He rode with her, and walked with her, and talked with
      her, and picnicked with her, and tiffined at Peliti's with her, till
      people put up their eyebrows and said: “Shocking!” Mrs. Bremmil stayed at
      home turning over the dead baby's frocks and crying into the empty cradle.
      She did not care to do anything else. But some eight dear, affectionate
      lady-friends explained the situation at length to her in case she should
      miss the cream of it. Mrs. Bremmil listened quietly, and thanked them for
      their good offices. She was not as clever as Mrs. Hauksbee, but she was no
      fool. She kept her own counsel, and did not speak to Bremmil of what she
      had heard. This is worth remembering. Speaking to, or crying over, a
      husband never did any good yet.
    

      When Bremmil was at home, which was not often, he was more affectionate
      than usual; and that showed his hand. The affection was forced partly to
      soothe his own conscience and partly to soothe Mrs. Bremmil. It failed in
      both regards.
    

      Then “the A.-D.-C. in Waiting was commanded by Their Excellencies, Lord
      and Lady Lytton, to invite Mr. and Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil to Peterhoff on
      July 26th at 9.30 P. M.”—“Dancing” in the bottom-left-hand corner.
    

      “I can't go,” said Mrs. Bremmil, “it is too soon after poor little Florrie—but
      it need not stop you, Tom.”
     

      She meant what she said then, and Bremmil said that he would go just to
      put in an appearance. Here he spoke the thing which was not; and Mrs.
      Bremmil knew it. She guessed—a woman's guess is much more accurate
      than a man's certainty—that he had meant to go from the first, and
      with Mrs. Hauksbee. She sat down to think, and the outcome of her thoughts
      was that the memory of a dead child was worth considerably less than the
      affections of a living husband.
    

      She made her plan and staked her all upon it. In that hour she discovered
      that she knew Tom Bremmil thoroughly, and this knowledge she acted on.
    

      “Tom,” said she, “I shall be dining out at the Longmores' on the evening
      of the 26th. You'd better dine at the club.”
     

      This saved Bremmil from making an excuse to get away and dine with Mrs.
      Hauksbee, so he was grateful, and felt small and mean at the same time—which
      was wholesome. Bremmil left the house at five for a ride. About half-past
      five in the evening a large leather-covered basket came in from Phelps'
      for Mrs. Bremmil. She was a woman who knew how to dress; and she had not
      spent a week on designing that dress and having it gored, and hemmed, and
      herring-boned, and tucked and rucked (or whatever the terms are) for
      nothing. It was a gorgeous dress—slight mourning. I can't describe
      it, but it was what The Queen calls “a creation”—a thing that hit
      you straight between the eyes and made you gasp. She had not much heart
      for what she was going to do; but as she glanced at the long mirror she
      had the satisfaction of knowing that she had never looked so well in her
      life. She was a large blonde and, when she chose, carried herself
      superbly.
    

      After the dinner at the Longmores, she went on to the dance—a little
      late—and encountered Bremmil with Mrs. Hauksbee on his arm.
    

      That made her flush, and as the men crowded round her for dances she
      looked magnificent. She filled up all her dances except three, and those
      she left blank. Mrs. Hauksbee caught her eye once; and she knew it was war—real
      war—between them. She started handicapped in the struggle, for she
      had ordered Bremmil about just the least little bit in the world too much;
      and he was beginning to resent it. Moreover, he had never seen his wife
      look so lovely.
    

      He stared at her from doorways, and glared at her from passages as she
      went about with her partners; and the more he stared, the more taken was
      he. He could scarcely believe that this was the woman with the red eyes
      and the black stuff gown who used to weep over the eggs at breakfast.
    

      Mrs. Hauksbee did her best to hold him in play, but, after two dances, he
      crossed over to his wife and asked for a dance.
    

      “I'm afraid you've come too late, MISTER Bremmil,” she said, with her eyes
      twinkling.
    

      Then he begged her to give him a dance, and, as a great favor, she allowed
      him the fifth waltz. Luckily it stood vacant on his programme. They danced
      it together, and there was a little flutter round the room. Bremmil had a
      sort of notion that his wife could dance, but he never knew she danced so
      divinely. At the end of that waltz he asked for another—as a favor,
      not as a right; and Mrs. Bremmil said: “Show me your programme, dear!” He
      showed it as a naughty little schoolboy hands up contraband sweets to a
      master.
    

      There was a fair sprinkling of “H” on it besides “H” at supper.
    

      Mrs. Bremmil said nothing, but she smiled contemptuously, ran her pencil
      through 7 and 9—two “H's”—and returned the card with her own
      name written above—a pet name that only she and her husband used.
      Then she shook her finger at him, and said, laughing: “Oh, you silly,
      SILLY boy!”
     

      Mrs. Hauksbee heard that, and—she owned as much—felt that she
      had the worst of it. Bremmil accepted 7 and 9 gratefully. They danced 7,
      and sat out 9 in one of the little tents. What Bremmil said and what Mrs.
      Bremmil said is no concern of any one's.
    

      When the band struck up “The Roast Beef of Old England,” the two went out
      into the verandah, and Bremmil began looking for his wife's dandy (this
      was before 'rickshaw days) while she went into the cloak-room. Mrs.
      Hauksbee came up and said: “You take me in to supper, I think, Mr.
      Bremmil.” Bremmil turned red and looked foolish. “Ah—h'm! I'm going
      home with my wife, Mrs. Hauksbee. I think there has been a little
      mistake.” Being a man, he spoke as though Mrs. Hauksbee were entirely
      responsible.
    

      Mrs. Bremmil came out of the cloak-room in a swansdown cloak with a white
      “cloud” round her head. She looked radiant; and she had a right to.
    

      The couple went off in the darkness together, Bremmil riding very close to
      the dandy.
    

      Then says Mrs. Hauksbee to me—she looked a trifle faded and jaded in
      the lamplight: “Take my word for it, the silliest woman can manage a
      clever man; but it needs a very clever woman to manage a fool.”
     

      Then we went in to supper.