THROWN AWAY.

 “And some are sulky, while some will plunge
     [So ho! Steady! Stand still, you!]
   Some you must gentle, and some you must lunge.
     [There! There! Who wants to kill you?]
   Some—there are losses in every trade—
     Will break their hearts ere bitted and made,
     Will fight like fiends as the rope cuts hard,
   And die dumb-mad in the breaking-yard.”
           —Toolungala Stockyard Chorus.

 To rear a boy under what parents call the “sheltered life system” is, if
      the boy must go into the world and fend for himself, not wise. Unless he
      be one in a thousand he has certainly to pass through many unnecessary
      troubles; and may, possibly, come to extreme grief simply from ignorance
      of the proper proportions of things.

 Let a puppy eat the soap in the bath-room or chew a newly-blacked boot. He
      chews and chuckles until, by and by, he finds out that blacking and Old
      Brown Windsor make him very sick; so he argues that soap and boots are not
      wholesome. Any old dog about the house will soon show him the unwisdom of
      biting big dogs' ears. Being young, he remembers and goes abroad, at six
      months, a well-mannered little beast with a chastened appetite. If he had
      been kept away from boots, and soap, and big dogs till he came to the
      trinity full-grown and with developed teeth, just consider how fearfully
      sick and thrashed he would be! Apply that motion to the “sheltered life,”
       and see how it works. It does not sound pretty, but it is the better of
      two evils.

 There was a Boy once who had been brought up under the “sheltered life”
       theory; and the theory killed him dead. He stayed with his people all his
      days, from the hour he was born till the hour he went into Sandhurst
      nearly at the top of the list. He was beautifully taught in all that wins
      marks by a private tutor, and carried the extra weight of “never having
      given his parents an hour's anxiety in his life.” What he learnt at
      Sandhurst beyond the regular routine is of no great consequence. He looked
      about him, and he found soap and blacking, so to speak, very good. He ate
      a little, and came out of Sandhurst not so high as he went in.

 Them there was an interval and a scene with his people, who expected much
      from him. Next a year of living “unspotted from the world” in a third-rate
      depot battalion where all the juniors were children, and all the seniors
      old women; and lastly he came out to India, where he was cut off from the
      support of his parents, and had no one to fall back on in time of trouble
      except himself.

 Now India is a place beyond all others where one must not take things too
      seriously—the midday sun always excepted. Too much work and too much
      energy kill a man just as effectively as too much assorted vice or too
      much drink. Flirtation does not matter because every one is being
      transferred and either you or she leave the Station, and never return.
      Good work does not matter, because a man is judged by his worst output and
      another man takes all the credit of his best as a rule. Bad work does not
      matter, because other men do worse, and incompetents hang on longer in
      India than anywhere else. Amusements do not matter, because you must
      repeat them as soon as you have accomplished them once, and most
      amusements only mean trying to win another person's money.

 Sickness does not matter, because it's all in the day's work, and if you
      die another man takes over your place and your office in the eight hours
      between death and burial. Nothing matters except Home furlough and acting
      allowances, and these only because they are scarce. This is a slack,
      kutcha country where all men work with imperfect instruments; and the
      wisest thing is to take no one and nothing in earnest, but to escape as
      soon as ever you can to some place where amusement is amusement and a
      reputation worth the having.

 But this Boy—the tale is as old as the Hills—came out, and
      took all things seriously. He was pretty and was petted. He took the
      pettings seriously, and fretted over women not worth saddling a pony to
      call upon. He found his new free life in India very good.

 It DOES look attractive in the beginning, from a Subaltern's point of view—all
      ponies, partners, dancing, and so on. He tasted it as the puppy tastes the
      soap. Only he came late to the eating, with a growing set of teeth. He had
      no sense of balance—just like the puppy—and could not
      understand why he was not treated with the consideration he received under
      his father's roof. This hurt his feelings.

 He quarrelled with other boys, and, being sensitive to the marrow,
      remembered these quarrels, and they excited him. He found whist, and
      gymkhanas, and things of that kind (meant to amuse one after office) good;
      but he took them seriously too, just as he took the “head” that followed
      after drink. He lost his money over whist and gymkhanas because they were
      new to him.

 He took his losses seriously, and wasted as much energy and interest over
      a two-gold-mohur race for maiden ekka-ponies with their manes hogged, as
      if it had been the Derby. One-half of this came from inexperience—much
      as the puppy squabbles with the corner of the hearth-rug—and the
      other half from the dizziness bred by stumbling out of his quiet life into
      the glare and excitement of a livelier one. No one told him about the soap
      and the blacking because an average man takes it for granted that an
      average man is ordinarily careful in regard to them. It was pitiful to
      watch The Boy knocking himself to pieces, as an over-handled colt falls
      down and cuts himself when he gets away from the groom.

 This unbridled license in amusements not worth the trouble of breaking
      line for, much less rioting over, endured for six months—all through
      one cold weather—and then we thought that the heat and the knowledge
      of having lost his money and health and lamed his horses would sober The
      Boy down, and he would stand steady. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred
      this would have happened. You can see the principle working in any Indian
      Station. But this particular case fell through because The Boy was
      sensitive and took things seriously—as I may have said some seven
      times before. Of course, we couldn't tell how his excesses struck him
      personally.

 They were nothing very heart-breaking or above the average. He might be
      crippled for life financially, and want a little nursing.

 Still the memory of his performances would wither away in one hot weather,
      and the shroff would help him to tide over the money troubles. But he must
      have taken another view altogether and have believed himself ruined beyond
      redemption. His Colonel talked to him severely when the cold weather
      ended. That made him more wretched than ever; and it was only an ordinary
      “Colonel's wigging!”

 What follows is a curious instance of the fashion in which we are all
      linked together and made responsible for one another. THE thing that
      kicked the beam in The Boy's mind was a remark that a woman made when he
      was talking to her. There is no use in repeating it, for it was only a
      cruel little sentence, rapped out before thinking, that made him flush to
      the roots of his hair. He kept himself to himself for three days, and then
      put in for two days' leave to go shooting near a Canal Engineer's Rest
      House about thirty miles out. He got his leave, and that night at Mess was
      noisier and more offensive than ever. He said that he was “going to shoot
      big game,” and left at half-past ten o'clock in an ekka.

 Partridge—which was the only thing a man could get near the Rest
      House—is not big game; so every one laughed.

 Next morning one of the Majors came in from short leave, and heard that
      The Boy had gone out to shoot “big game.” The Major had taken an interest
      in The Boy, and had, more than once, tried to check him in the cold
      weather. The Major put up his eyebrows when he heard of the expedition and
      went to The Boy's room, where he rummaged.

 Presently he came out and found me leaving cards on the Mess.

 There was no one else in the ante-room.

 He said: “The Boy has gone out shooting. DOES a man shoot [missing] with a
      revolver and a writing-case?”

 I said: “Nonsense, Major!” for I saw what was in his mind.

 He said: “Nonsense or nonsense, I'm going to the Canal now—at once.
      I don't feel easy.”

 Then he thought for a minute, and said: “Can you lie?”

 “You know best,” I answered. “It's my profession.”

 “Very well,” said the Major; “you must come out with me now—at once—in
      an ekka to the Canal to shoot black-buck. Go and put on shikar-kit—quick—and
      drive here with a gun.”

 The Major was a masterful man; and I knew that he would not give orders
      for nothing. So I obeyed, and on return found the Major packed up in an
      ekka—gun-cases and food slung below—all ready for a
      shooting-trip.

 He dismissed the driver and drove himself. We jogged along quietly while
      in the station; but as soon as we got to the dusty road across the plains,
      he made that pony fly. A country-bred can do nearly anything at a pinch.
      We covered the thirty miles in under three hours, but the poor brute was
      nearly dead.

 Once I said: “What's the blazing hurry, Major?”

 He said, quietly: “The Boy has been alone, by himself, for—one, two,
      five—fourteen hours now! I tell you, I don't feel easy.”

 This uneasiness spread itself to me, and I helped to beat the pony.

 When we came to the Canal Engineer's Rest House the Major called for The
      Boy's servant; but there was no answer. Then we went up to the house,
      calling for The Boy by name; but there was no answer.

 “Oh, he's out shooting,” said I.

 Just then I saw through one of the windows a little hurricane-lamp
      burning. This was at four in the afternoon. We both stopped dead in the
      verandah, holding our breath to catch every sound; and we heard, inside
      the room, the “brr—brr—brr” of a multitude of flies. The Major
      said nothing, but he took off his helmet and we entered very softly.

 The Boy was dead on the charpoy in the centre of the bare, lime-washed
      room. He had shot his head nearly to pieces with his revolver. The
      gun-cases were still strapped, so was the bedding, and on the table lay
      The Boy's writing-case with photographs. He had gone away to die like a
      poisoned rat!

 The Major said to himself softly: “Poor Boy! Poor, POOR devil!” Then he
      turned away from the bed and said: “I want your help in this business.”

 Knowing The Boy was dead by his own hand, I saw exactly what that help
      would be, so I passed over to the table, took a chair, lit a cheroot, and
      began to go through the writing-case; the Major looking over my shoulder
      and repeating to himself: “We came too late!—Like a rat in a hole!—Poor,
      POOR devil!”

 The Boy must have spent half the night in writing to his people, and to
      his Colonel, and to a girl at Home; and as soon as he had finished, must
      have shot himself, for he had been dead a long time when we came in.

 I read all that he had written, and passed over each sheet to the Major as
      I finished it.

 We saw from his accounts how very seriously he had taken everything. He
      wrote about “disgrace which he was unable to bear”—“indelible shame”—“criminal
      folly”—“wasted life,” and so on; besides a lot of private things to
      his Father and Mother too much too sacred to put into print. The letter to
      the girl at Home was the most pitiful of all; and I choked as I read it.
      The Major made no attempt to keep dry-eyed. I respected him for that. He
      read and rocked himself to and fro, and simply cried like a woman without
      caring to hide it. The letters were so dreary and hopeless and touching.
      We forgot all about The Boy's follies, and only thought of the poor Thing
      on the charpoy and the scrawled sheets in our hands. It was utterly
      impossible to let the letters go Home.

 They would have broken his Father's heart and killed his Mother after
      killing her belief in her son.

 At last the Major dried his eyes openly, and said: “Nice sort of thing to
      spring on an English family! What shall we do?”

 I said, knowing what the Major had brought me but for: “The Boy died of
      cholera. We were with him at the time. We can't commit ourselves to
      half-measures. Come along.”

 Then began one of the most grimy comic scenes I have ever taken part in—the
      concoction of a big, written lie, bolstered with evidence, to soothe The
      Boy's people at Home. I began the rough draft of a letter, the Major
      throwing in hints here and there while he gathered up all the stuff that
      The Boy had written and burnt it in the fireplace. It was a hot, still
      evening when we began, and the lamp burned very badly. In due course I got
      the draft to my satisfaction, setting forth how The Boy was the pattern of
      all virtues, beloved by his regiment, with every promise of a great career
      before him, and so on; how we had helped him through the sickness—it
      was no time for little lies, you will understand—and how he had died
      without pain. I choked while I was putting down these things and thinking
      of the poor people who would read them.

 Then I laughed at the grotesqueness of the affair, and the laughter mixed
      itself up with the choke—and the Major said that we both wanted
      drinks.

 I am afraid to say how much whiskey we drank before the letter was
      finished. It had not the least effect on us. Then we took off The Boy's
      watch, locket, and rings.

 Lastly, the Major said: “We must send a lock of hair too. A woman values
      that.”

 But there were reasons why we could not find a lock fit to send.

 The Boy was black-haired, and so was the Major, luckily. I cut off a piece
      of the Major's hair above the temple with a knife, and put it into the
      packet we were making. The laughing-fit and the chokes got hold of me
      again, and I had to stop. The Major was nearly as bad; and we both knew
      that the worst part of the work was to come.

 We sealed up the packet, photographs, locket, seals, ring, letter, and
      lock of hair with The Boy's sealing-wax and The Boy's seal.

 Then the Major said: “For God's sake let's get outside—away from the
      room—and think!”

 We went outside, and walked on the banks of the Canal for an hour, eating
      and drinking what we had with us, until the moon rose. I know now exactly
      how a murderer feels. Finally, we forced ourselves back to the room with
      the lamp and the Other Thing in it, and began to take up the next piece of
      work. I am not going to write about this. It was too horrible. We burned
      the bedstead and dropped the ashes into the Canal; we took up the matting
      of the room and treated that in the same way. I went off to a village and
      borrowed two big hoes—I did not want the villagers to help—while
      the Major arranged—the other matters. It took us four hours' hard
      work to make the grave. As we worked, we argued out whether it was right
      to say as much as we remembered of the Burial of the Dead.

 We compromised things by saying the Lord's Prayer with a private
      unofficial prayer for the peace of the soul of The Boy. Then we filled in
      the grave and went into the verandah—not the house—to lie down
      to sleep. We were dead-tired.

 When we woke the Major said, wearily: “We can't go back till tomorrow. We
      must give him a decent time to die in. He died early THIS morning,
      remember. That seems more natural.” So the Major must have been lying
      awake all the time, thinking.

 I said: “Then why didn't we bring the body back to the cantonments?”

 The Major thought for a minute:—“Because the people bolted when they
      heard of the cholera. And the ekka has gone!”

 That was strictly true. We had forgotten all about the ekka-pony, and he
      had gone home.

 So, we were left there alone, all that stifling day, in the Canal Rest
      House, testing and re-testing our story of The Boy's death to see if it
      was weak at any point. A native turned up in the afternoon, but we said
      that a Sahib was dead of cholera, and he ran away. As the dusk gathered,
      the Major told me all his fears about The Boy, and awful stories of
      suicide or nearly-carried-out suicide—tales that made one's hair
      crisp. He said that he himself had once gone into the same Valley of the
      Shadow as the Boy, when he was young and new to the country; so he
      understood how things fought together in The Boy's poor jumbled head. He
      also said that youngsters, in their repentant moments, consider their sins
      much more serious and ineffaceable than they really are. We talked
      together all through the evening, and rehearsed the story of the death of
      The Boy. As soon as the moon was up, and The Boy, theoretically, just
      buried, we struck across country for the Station. We walked from eight
      till six o'clock in the morning; but though we were dead-tired, we did not
      forget to go to The Boy's room and put away his revolver with the proper
      amount of cartridges in the pouch. Also to set his writing-case on the
      table. We found the Colonel and reported the death, feeling more like
      murderers than ever. Then we went to bed and slept the clock round; for
      there was no more in us.

 The tale had credence as long as was necessary, for every one forgot about
      The Boy before a fortnight was over. Many people, however, found time to
      say that the Major had behaved scandalously in not bringing in the body
      for a regimental funeral. The saddest thing of all was a letter from The
      Boy's mother to the Major and me—with big inky blisters all over the
      sheet. She wrote the sweetest possible things about our great kindness,
      and the obligation she would be under to us as long as she lived.

 All things considered, she WAS under an obligation; but not exactly as she
      meant.