TO BE HELD FOR REFERENCE.
    

 By the hoof of the Wild Goat up-tossed
 From the Cliff where She lay in the Sun,
     Fell the Stone To the Tarn where the daylight is lost;
 So She fell from the light of the Sun,
     And alone.

 Now the fall was ordained from the first,
 With the Goat and the Cliff and the Tarn,
     But the Stone Knows only Her life is accursed,
 As She sinks in the depths of the Tarn,
     And alone.

 Oh, Thou who has builded the world,
 Oh, Thou who hast lighted the Sun!
 Oh, Thou who hast darkened the Tarn!
    Judge Thou The Sin of the Stone that was hurled
 By the Goat from the light of the Sun,
 As She sinks in the mire of the Tarn,
    Even now—even now—even now!
      —From the Unpublished Papers of McIntosh Jellaludin.

   “Say, is it dawn, is it dusk in thy Bower,
    Thou whom I long for, who longest for me?
    Oh be it night—be it—”
 

      Here he fell over a little camel-colt that was sleeping in the Serai where
      the horse-traders and the best of the blackguards from Central Asia live;
      and, because he was very drunk indeed and the night was dark, he could not
      rise again till I helped him. That was the beginning of my acquaintance
      with McIntosh Jellaludin. When a loafer, and drunk, sings The Song of the
      Bower, he must be worth cultivating. He got off the camel's back and said,
      rather thickly:—“I—I—I'm a bit screwed, but a dip in
      Loggerhead will put me right again; and I say, have you spoken to Symonds
      about the mare's knees?”
     

      Now Loggerhead was six thousand weary miles away from us, close to
      Mesopotamia, where you mustn't fish and poaching is impossible, and
      Charley Symonds' stable a half mile further across the paddocks. It was
      strange to hear all the old names, on a May night, among the horses and
      camels of the Sultan Caravanserai. Then the man seemed to remember himself
      and sober down at the same time. He leaned against the camel and pointed
      to a corner of the Serai where a lamp was burning:—
    

      “I live there,” said he, “and I should be extremely obliged if you would
      be good enough to help my mutinous feet thither; for I am more than
      usually drunk—most—most phenomenally tight. But not in respect
      to my head. 'My brain cries out against'—how does it go? But my head
      rides on the—rolls on the dung-hill I should have said, and controls
      the qualm.”
     

      I helped him through the gangs of tethered horses and he collapsed on the
      edge of the verandah in front of the line of native quarters.
    

      “Thanks—a thousand thanks! O Moon and little, little Stars! To think
      that a man should so shamelessly.... Infamous liquor, too. Ovid in exile
      drank no worse. Better. It was frozen. Alas! I had no ice. Good night. I
      would introduce you to my wife were I sober—or she civilized.”
     

      A native woman came out of the darkness of the room, and began calling the
      man names; so I went away. He was the most interesting loafer that I had
      the pleasure of knowing for a long time; and later on, he became a friend
      of mine. He was a tall, well-built, fair man fearfully shaken with drink,
      and he looked nearer fifty than the thirty-five which, he said, was his
      real age. When a man begins to sink in India, and is not sent Home by his
      friends as soon as may be, he falls very low from a respectable point of
      view. By the time that he changes his creed, as did McIntosh, he is past
      redemption.
    

      In most big cities, natives will tell you of two or three Sahibs,
      generally low-caste, who have turned Hindu or Mussulman, and who live more
      or less as such. But it is not often that you can get to know them. As
      McIntosh himself used to say:—“If I change my religion for my
      stomach's sake, I do not seek to become a martyr to missionaries, nor am I
      anxious for notoriety.”
     

      At the outset of acquaintance McIntosh warned me. “Remember this. I am not
      an object for charity. I require neither your money, your food, nor your
      cast-off raiment. I am that rare animal, a self-supporting drunkard. If
      you choose, I will smoke with you, for the tobacco of the bazars does not,
      I admit, suit my palate; and I will borrow any books which you may not
      specially value. It is more than likely that I shall sell them for bottles
      of excessively filthy country-liquors. In return, you shall share such
      hospitality as my house affords. Here is a charpoy on which two can sit,
      and it is possible that there may, from time to time, be food in that
      platter. Drink, unfortunately, you will find on the premises at any hour:
      and thus I make you welcome to all my poor establishments.”
     

      I was admitted to the McIntosh household—I and my good tobacco.
    

      But nothing else. Unluckily, one cannot visit a loafer in the Serai by
      day. Friends buying horses would not understand it.
    

      Consequently, I was obliged to see McIntosh after dark. He laughed at
      this, and said simply:—“You are perfectly right. When I enjoyed a
      position in society, rather higher than yours, I should have done exactly
      the same thing, Good Heavens! I was once”—he spoke as though he had
      fallen from the Command of a Regiment—“an Oxford Man!” This
      accounted for the reference to Charley Symonds' stable.
    

      “You,” said McIntosh, slowly, “have not had that advantage; but, to
      outward appearance, you do not seem possessed of a craving for strong
      drinks. On the whole, I fancy that you are the luckier of the two. Yet I
      am not certain. You are—forgive my saying so even while I am smoking
      your excellent tobacco—painfully ignorant of many things.”
     

      We were sitting together on the edge of his bedstead, for he owned no
      chairs, watching the horses being watered for the night, while the native
      woman was preparing dinner. I did not like being patronized by a loafer,
      but I was his guest for the time being, though he owned only one very torn
      alpaca-coat and a pair of trousers made out of gunny-bags. He took the
      pipe out of his mouth, and went on judicially:—“All things
      considered, I doubt whether you are the luckier. I do not refer to your
      extremely limited classical attainments, or your excruciating quantities,
      but to your gross ignorance of matters more immediately under your notice.
      That for instance.”—He pointed to a woman cleaning a samovar near
      the well in the centre of the Serai. She was flicking the water out of the
      spout in regular cadenced jerks.
    

      “There are ways and ways of cleaning samovars. If you knew why she was
      doing her work in that particular fashion, you would know what the Spanish
      Monk meant when he said—
    

   'I the Trinity illustrate,
     Drinking watered orange-pulp—
   In three sips the Aryan frustrate,
     While he drains his at one gulp.—'


      and many other things which now are hidden from your eyes. However, Mrs.
      McIntosh has prepared dinner. Let us come and eat after the fashion of the
      people of the country—of whom, by the way, you know nothing.”
     

      The native woman dipped her hand in the dish with us. This was wrong. The
      wife should always wait until the husband has eaten.
    

      McIntosh Jellaludin apologized, saying:—
    

      “It is an English prejudice which I have not been able to overcome; and
      she loves me. Why, I have never been able to understand. I fore-gathered
      with her at Jullundur, three years ago, and she has remained with me ever
      since. I believe her to be moral, and know her to be skilled in cookery.”
     

      He patted the woman's head as he spoke, and she cooed softly. She was not
      pretty to look at.
    

      McIntosh never told me what position he had held before his fall.
    

      He was, when sober, a scholar and a gentleman. When drunk, he was rather
      more of the first than the second. He used to get drunk about once a week
      for two days. On those occasions the native woman tended him while he
      raved in all tongues except his own. One day, indeed, he began reciting
      Atalanta in Calydon, and went through it to the end, beating time to the
      swing of the verse with a bedstead-leg. But he did most of his ravings in
      Greek or German. The man's mind was a perfect rag-bag of useless things.
      Once, when he was beginning to get sober, he told me that I was the only
      rational being in the Inferno into which he had descended—a Virgil
      in the Shades, he said—and that, in return for my tobacco, he would,
      before he died, give me the materials of a new Inferno that should make me
      greater than Dante. Then he fell asleep on a horse-blanket and woke up
      quite calm.
    

      “Man,” said he, “when you have reached the uttermost depths of
      degradation, little incidents which would vex a higher life, are to you of
      no consequence. Last night, my soul was among the gods; but I make no
      doubt that my bestial body was writhing down here in the garbage.”
     

      “You were abominably drunk if that's what you mean,” I said.
    

      “I WAS drunk—filthy drunk. I who am the son of a man with whom you
      have no concern—I who was once Fellow of a College whose
      buttery-hatch you have not seen. I was loathsomely drunk. But consider how
      lightly I am touched. It is nothing to me. Less than nothing; for I do not
      even feel the headache which should be my portion. Now, in a higher life,
      how ghastly would have been my punishment, how bitter my repentance!
      Believe me, my friend with the neglected education, the highest is as the
      lowest—always supposing each degree extreme.”
     

      He turned round on the blanket, put his head between his fists and
      continued:—
    

      “On the Soul which I have lost and on the Conscience which I have killed,
      I tell you that I CANNOT feel! I am as the gods, knowing good and evil,
      but untouched by either. Is this enviable or is it not?”
     

      When a man has lost the warning of “next morning's head,” he must be in a
      bad state, I answered, looking at McIntosh on the blanket, with his hair
      over his eyes and his lips blue-white, that I did not think the
      insensibility good enough.
    

      “For pity's sake, don't say that! I tell you, it IS good and most
      enviable. Think of my consolations!”
     

      “Have you so many, then, McIntosh?”
     

      “Certainly; your attempts at sarcasm which is essentially the weapon of a
      cultured man, are crude. First, my attainments, my classical and literary
      knowledge, blurred, perhaps, by immoderate drinking—which reminds me
      that before my soul went to the Gods last night, I sold the Pickering
      Horace you so kindly lent me. Ditta Mull the Clothesman has it. It fetched
      ten annas, and may be redeemed for a rupee—but still infinitely
      superior to yours. Secondly, the abiding affection of Mrs. McIntosh, best
      of wives. Thirdly, a monument, more enduring than brass, which I have
      built up in the seven years of my degradation.”
     

      He stopped here, and crawled across the room for a drink of water.
    

      He was very shaky and sick.
    

      He referred several times to his “treasure”—some great possession
      that he owned—but I held this to be the raving of drink. He was as
      poor and as proud as he could be. His manner was not pleasant, but he knew
      enough about the natives, among whom seven years of his life had been
      spent, to make his acquaintance worth having. He used actually to laugh at
      Strickland as an ignorant man—“ignorant West and East”—he
      said. His boast was, first, that he was an Oxford Man of rare and shining
      parts, which may or may not have been true—I did not know enough to
      check his statements—and, secondly, that he “had his hand on the
      pulse of native life”—which was a fact. As an Oxford man, he struck
      me as a prig: he was always throwing his education about. As a Mahommedan
      faquir—as McIntosh Jellaludin—he was all that I wanted for my
      own ends. He smoked several pounds of my tobacco, and taught me several
      ounces of things worth knowing; but he would never accept any gifts, not
      even when the cold weather came, and gripped the poor thin chest under the
      poor thin alpaca-coat. He grew very angry, and said that I had insulted
      him, and that he was not going into hospital. He had lived like a beast
      and he would die rationally, like a man.
    

      As a matter of fact, he died of pneumonia; and on the night of his death
      sent over a grubby note asking me to come and help him to die.
    

      The native woman was weeping by the side of the bed. McIntosh, wrapped in
      a cotton cloth, was too weak to resent a fur coat being thrown over him.
      He was very active as far as his mind was concerned, and his eyes were
      blazing. When he had abused the Doctor who came with me so foully that the
      indignant old fellow left, he cursed me for a few minutes and calmed down.
    

      Then he told his wife to fetch out “The Book” from a hole in the wall. She
      brought out a big bundle, wrapped in the tail of a petticoat, of old
      sheets of miscellaneous note-paper, all numbered and covered with fine
      cramped writing. McIntosh ploughed his hand through the rubbish and
      stirred it up lovingly.
    

      “This,” he said, “is my work—the Book of McIntosh Jellaludin,
      showing what he saw and how he lived, and what befell him and others;
      being also an account of the life and sins and death of Mother Maturin.
      What Mirza Murad Ali Beg's book is to all other books on native life, will
      my work be to Mirza Murad Ali Beg's!”
     

      This, as will be conceded by any one who knows Mirza Ali Beg's book, was a
      sweeping statement. The papers did not look specially valuable; but
      McIntosh handled them as if they were currency-notes.
    

      Then he said slowly:—“In despite the many weaknesses of your
      education, you have been good to me. I will speak of your tobacco when I
      reach the Gods. I owe you much thanks for many kindnesses.
    

      “But I abominate indebtedness. For this reason I bequeath to you now the
      monument more enduring than brass—my one book—rude and
      imperfect in parts, but oh, how rare in others! I wonder if you will
      understand it. It is a gift more honorable than... Bah! where is my brain
      rambling to? You will mutilate it horribly. You will knock out the gems
      you call 'Latin quotations,' you Philistine, and you will butcher the
      style to carve into your own jerky jargon; but you cannot destroy the
      whole of it. I bequeath it to you.
    

      “Ethel... My brain again!.. Mrs. McIntosh, bear witness that I give the
      sahib all these papers. They would be of no use to you, Heart of my heart;
      and I lay it upon you,” he turned to me here, “that you do not let my book
      die in its present form. It is yours unconditionally—the story of
      McIntosh Jellaludin, which is NOT the story of McIntosh Jellaludin, but of
      a greater man than he, and of a far greater woman. Listen now! I am
      neither mad nor drunk! That book will make you famous.”
     

      I said, “thank you,” as the native woman put the bundle into my arms.
    

      “My only baby!” said McIntosh with a smile. He was sinking fast, but he
      continued to talk as long as breath remained. I waited for the end:
      knowing that, in six cases out of ten the dying man calls for his mother.
      He turned on his side and said:—
    

      “Say how it came into your possession. No one will believe you, but my
      name, at least, will live. You will treat it brutally, I know you will.
      Some of it must go; the public are fools and prudish fools. I was their
      servant once. But do your mangling gently—very gently. It is a great
      work, and I have paid for it in seven years' damnation.”
     

      His voice stopped for ten or twelve breaths, and then he began mumbling a
      prayer of some kind in Greek. The native woman cried very bitterly.
      Lastly, he rose in bed and said, as loudly as slowly:—“Not guilty,
      my Lord!”
     

      Then he fell back, and the stupor held him till he died. The native woman
      ran into the Serai among the horses and screamed and beat her breasts; for
      she had loved him.
    

      Perhaps his last sentence in life told what McIntosh had once gone
      through; but, saving the big bundle of old sheets in the cloth, there was
      nothing in his room to say who or what he had been.
    

      The papers were in a hopeless muddle.
    

      Strickland helped me to sort them, and he said that the writer was either
      an extreme liar or a most wonderful person. He thought the former. One of
      these days, you may be able to judge for yourself.
    

      The bundle needed much expurgation and was full of Greek nonsense, at the
      head of the chapters, which has all been cut out.
    

      If the things are ever published some one may perhaps remember this story,
      now printed as a safeguard to prove that McIntosh Jellaludin and not I
      myself wrote the Book of Mother Maturin.
    

      I don't want the Giant's Robe to come true in my case.
    







      VOLUME VI THE LIGHT THAT FAILED