TODS' AMENDMENT.

 The World hath set its heavy yoke
   Upon the old white-bearded folk
     Who strive to please the King.

   God's mercy is upon the young,
   God's wisdom in the baby tongue
     That fears not anything.
         —The Parable of Chajju Bhagat.

 Now Tods' Mamma was a singularly charming woman, and every one in Simla
      knew Tods. Most men had saved him from death on occasions.

 He was beyond his ayah's control altogether, and perilled his life daily
      to find out what would happen if you pulled a Mountain Battery mule's
      tail. He was an utterly fearless young Pagan, about six years old, and the
      only baby who ever broke the holy calm of the supreme Legislative Council.

 It happened this way: Tods' pet kid got loose, and fled up the hill, off
      the Boileaugunge Road, Tods after it, until it burst into the Viceregal
      Lodge lawn, then attached to “Peterhoff.” The Council were sitting at the
      time, and the windows were open because it was warm. The Red Lancer in the
      porch told Tods to go away; but Tods knew the Red Lancer and most of the
      Members of Council personally.

 Moreover, he had firm hold of the kid's collar, and was being dragged all
      across the flower-beds. “Give my salaam to the long Councillor Sahib, and
      ask him to help me take Moti back!” gasped Tods. The Council heard the
      noise through the open windows; and, after an interval, was seen the
      shocking spectacle of a Legal Member and a Lieutenant-Governor helping,
      under the direct patronage of a Commander-in-Chief and a Viceroy, one
      small and very dirty boy in a sailor's suit and a tangle of brown hair, to
      coerce a lively and rebellious kid. They headed it off down the path to
      the Mall, and Tods went home in triumph and told his Mamma that ALL the
      Councillor Sahibs had been helping him to catch Moti. Whereat his Mamma
      smacked Tods for interfering with the administration of the Empire; but
      Tods met the Legal Member the next day, and told him in confidence that if
      the Legal Member ever wanted to catch a goat, he, Tods, would give him all
      the help in his power. “Thank you, Tods,” said the Legal Member.

 Tods was the idol of some eighty jhampanis, and half as many saises.

 He saluted them all as “O Brother.” It never entered his head that any
      living human being could disobey his orders; and he was the buffer between
      the servants and his Mamma's wrath. The working of that household turned
      on Tods, who was adored by every one from the dhoby to the dog-boy. Even
      Futteh Khan, the villainous loafer khit from Mussoorie, shirked risking
      Tods' displeasure for fear his co-mates should look down on him.

 So Tods had honor in the land from Boileaugunge to Chota Simla, and ruled
      justly according to his lights. Of course, he spoke Urdu, but he had also
      mastered many queer side-speeches like the chotee bolee of the women, and
      held grave converse with shopkeepers and Hill-coolies alike. He was
      precocious for his age, and his mixing with natives had taught him some of
      the more bitter truths of life; the meanness and the sordidness of it. He
      used, over his bread and milk, to deliver solemn and serious aphorisms,
      translated from the vernacular into the English, that made his Mamma jump
      and vow that Tods MUST go home next hot weather.

 Just when Tods was in the bloom of his power, the Supreme Legislature were
      hacking out a Bill, for the Sub-Montane Tracts, a revision of the then
      Act, smaller than the Punjab Land Bill, but affecting a few hundred
      thousand people none the less. The Legal Member had built, and bolstered,
      and embroidered, and amended that Bill, till it looked beautiful on paper.
      Then the Council began to settle what they called the “minor details.” As
      if any Englishman legislating for natives knows enough to know which are
      the minor and which are the major points, from the native point of view,
      of any measure! That Bill was a triumph of “safe-guarding the interests of
      the tenant.” One clause provided that land should not be leased on longer
      terms than five years at a stretch; because, if the landlord had a tenant
      bound down for, say, twenty years, he would squeeze the very life out of
      him. The notion was to keep up a stream of independent cultivators in the
      Sub-Montane Tracts; and ethnologically and politically the notion was
      correct. The only drawback was that it was altogether wrong. A native's
      life in India implies the life of his son. Wherefore, you cannot legislate
      for one generation at a time. You must consider the next from the native
      point of view. Curiously enough, the native now and then, and in Northern
      India more particularly, hates being over-protected against himself. There
      was a Naga village once, where they lived on dead AND buried Commissariat
      mules.... But that is another story.

 For many reasons, to be explained later, the people concerned objected to
      the Bill. The Native Member in Council knew as much about Punjabis as he
      knew about Charing Cross. He had said in Calcutta that “the Bill was
      entirely in accord with the desires of that large and important class, the
      cultivators;” and so on, and so on. The Legal Member's knowledge of
      natives was limited to English-speaking Durbaris, and his own red
      chaprassis, the Sub-Montane Tracts concerned no one in particular, the
      Deputy Commissioners were a good deal too driven to make representations,
      and the measure was one which dealt with small landholders only.
      Nevertheless, the Legal Member prayed that it might be correct, for he was
      a nervously conscientious man. He did not know that no man can tell what
      natives think unless he mixes with them with the varnish off. And not
      always then. But he did the best he knew. And the measure came up to the
      Supreme Council for the final touches, while Tods patrolled the Burra
      Simla Bazar in his morning rides, and played with the monkey belonging to
      Ditta Mull, the bunnia, and listened, as a child listens to all the stray
      talk about this new freak of the Lat Sahib's.

 One day there was a dinner-party, at the house of Tods' Mamma, and the
      Legal Member came. Tods was in bed, but he kept awake till he heard the
      bursts of laughter from the men over the coffee. Then he paddled out in
      his little red flannel dressing-gown and his night-suit, and took refuge
      by the side of his father, knowing that he would not be sent back. “See
      the miseries of having a family!” said Tods' father, giving Tods three
      prunes, some water in a glass that had been used for claret, and telling
      him to sit still. Tods sucked the prunes slowly, knowing that he would
      have to go when they were finished, and sipped the pink water like a man
      of the world, as he listened to the conversation. Presently, the Legal
      Member, talking “shop,” to the Head of a Department, mentioned his Bill by
      its full name—“The Sub-Montane Tracts Ryotwari Revised Enactment.”
       Tods caught the one native word, and lifting up his small voice said:—“Oh,
      I know ALL about that! Has it been murramutted yet, Councillor Sahib?”

 “How much?” said the Legal Member.

 “Murramutted—mended.—Put theek, you know—made nice to
      please Ditta Mull!”

 The Legal Member left his place and moved up next to Tods.

 “What do you know about Ryotwari, little man?” he said.

 “I'm not a little man, I'm Tods, and I know ALL about it. Ditta Mull, and
      Choga Lall, and Amir Nath, and—oh, lakhs of my friends tell me about
      it in the bazars when I talk to them.”

 “Oh, they do—do they? What do they say, Tods?”

 Tods tucked his feet under his red flannel dressing-gown and said:—“I
      must fink.”

 The Legal Member waited patiently. Then Tods, with infinite compassion:

 “You don't speak my talk, do you, Councillor Sahib?”

 “No; I am sorry to say I do not,” said the Legal' Member.

 “Very well,” said Tods. “I must fink in English.”

 He spent a minute putting his ideas in order, and began very slowly,
      translating in his mind from the vernacular to English, as many
      Anglo-Indian children do. You must remember that the Legal Member helped
      him on by questions when he halted, for Tods was not equal to the
      sustained flight of oratory that follows.

 “Ditta Mull says:—'This thing is the talk of a child, and was made
      up by fools.' But I don't think you are a fool, Councillor Sahib,” said
      Tods, hastily. “You caught my goat. This is what Ditta Mull says:—'I
      am not a fool, and why should the Sirkar say I am a child? I can see if
      the land is good and if the landlord is good. If I am a fool, the sin is
      upon my own head. For five years I take my ground for which I have saved
      money, and a wife I take too, and a little son is born.' Ditta Mull has
      one daughter now, but he SAYS he will have a son, soon. And he says: 'At
      the end of five years, by this new bundobust, I must go. If I do not go, I
      must get fresh seals and takkus-stamps on the papers, perhaps in the
      middle of the harvest, and to go to the law-courts once is wisdom, but to
      go twice is Jehannum.' That is QUITE true,” explained Tods, gravely. “All
      my friends say so. And Ditta Mull says:—'Always fresh takkus and
      paying money to vakils and chaprassis and law-courts every five years or
      else the landlord makes me go. Why do I want to go? Am I fool? If I am a
      fool and do not know, after forty years, good land when I see it, let me
      die! But if the new bundobust says for FIFTEEN years, then it is good and
      wise. My little son is a man, and I am burnt, and he takes the ground or
      another ground, paying only once for the takkus-stamps on the papers, and
      his little son is born, and at the end of fifteen years is a man too. But
      what profit is there in five years and fresh papers? Nothing but dikh,
      trouble, dikh. We are not young men who take these lands, but old ones—not
      jais, but tradesmen with a little money—and for fifteen years we
      shall have peace. Nor are we children that the Sirkar should treat us so.”

 Here Tods stopped short, for the whole table were listening. The Legal
      Member said to Tods: “Is that all?”

 “All I can remember,” said Tods. “But you should see Ditta Mull's big
      monkey. It's just like a Councillor Sahib.”

 “Tods! Go to bed,” said his father.

 Tods gathered up his dressing-gown tail and departed.

 The Legal Member brought his hand down on the table with a crash—“By
      Jove!” said the Legal Member, “I believe the boy is right. The short
      tenure IS the weak point.”

 He left early, thinking over what Tods had said. Now, it was obviously
      impossible for the Legal Member to play with a bunnia's monkey, by way of
      getting understanding; but he did better. He made inquiries, always
      bearing in mind the fact that the real native—not the hybrid,
      University-trained mule—is as timid as a colt, and, little by
      little, he coaxed some of the men whom the measure concerned most
      intimately to give in their views, which squared very closely with Tods'
      evidence.

 So the Bill was amended in that clause; and the Legal Member was filled
      with an uneasy suspicion that Native Members represent very little except
      the Orders they carry on their bosoms. But he put the thought from him as
      illiberal. He was a most Liberal Man.

 After a time the news spread through the bazars that Tods had got the Bill
      recast in the tenure clause, and if Tods' Mamma had not interfered, Tods
      would have made himself sick on the baskets of fruit and pistachio nuts
      and Cabuli grapes and almonds that crowded the verandah. Till he went
      Home, Tods ranked some few degrees before the Viceroy in popular
      estimation. But for the little life of him Tods could not understand why.

 In the Legal Member's private-paper-box still lies the rough draft of the
      Sub-Montane Tracts Ryotwari Revised Enactment; and, opposite the
      twenty-second clause, pencilled in blue chalk, and signed by the Legal
      Member, are the words “Tods' Amendment.”