[

229 ] 

TOLD IN THE ‘CORONA’S’ CABIN. 

————



ON THREE EVENINGS.



————

 The First Evening.

 In

the south-east trades, and the big ship moving
steadily through the water with every sail full. Not a
quiver of the tightly-strained canvas, not the rattle of a
reef-point, broke the stillness aloft.

 A glorious evening in the South Atlantic, with the
sun setting, as is often his wont in those latitudes, in a
bed of crimson, gold and amethyst. The passengers,
who had been watching the many-hued passing of the
day-king, went below as the cool night breeze began to
whistle with a shriller note through the top-hamper
and the water to swish more loudly along the sides,
and fall back with a louder plop. Very comfortable,
snug, and home-like the Corona’s

cabin looked. It was a
cabin, remember, not a ‘saloon.’

 There was nothing of the modern curse of varnish
and veneer about it. Everything was handsome,
also substantial, from the dark mahogany casing of [

230 ]

the mizzen-mast to the highly polished, solid panelling TN: original reads "pannelling" of rosewood, relieved with only a narrow gold
beading. The cabin might aptly have been termed
a study in brown and gold, so predominant was
this combination. Even the curtains in front of
each berth door were of brown damask, with gold
fringe. The general effect, if a little sombre, was
good.

 Especially good it seemed this evening to the passengers
as they came trooping in with talk and laughter;
especially snug and home-like, with its three big
swinging moderator lamps, its long table covered
with odds and ends of female work, books, papers,
etc., etc., its piano, and its comfortable couches
scattered here and there.

 The Corona’s

great beam had been utilised to
some purpose, and, thus, her cabin was not, like
the saloons of so many sailing ships, a sort of stage
drawing-room, all white paint, gilding, glass, spindle-shanked
chairs, and turn-over-at-a-touch tables.

 The company suited the cabin. There were only
a dozen or so of them, mostly middle-aged married
folk, who had left their grown-up families in Australia
whilst they took a trip ‘Home,’ and were now returning
to their adopted country. Amongst them, however,
were two or three single ladies of uncertain ages,
bound to the Land of the Golden Fleece in search
of fortune, even if it should only come in the shape
of a husband. There was, also, Miss Amy Hillier,
an Australian heiress in her own right, returning to [

231 ]

her native land with an uncle and an aunt. This is
another man’s story; so that I am not going to take
up space by a description of Amy Hillier’s charms;
suffice it to say here that she was young and pretty,
and as good as she was young and pretty.

 Wonderful to relate, the company of passengers
fitted each other. Each seemed to have discovered
in another his or her affinity, and, up to this, there
had been none of the usual backbitings, heart-burnings,
and malicious tittle-tattle usually so inseparable
from a sea voyage in a sailing ship.

 Miss Hillier had seated herself at the piano, and
was playing something from Lohengrin

, when a remarkable-looking
man, entering the cabin, doffed
his gold-banded cap, and made his way to her
side.

 Strongly, yet gracefully built, upright as the royal
pole, active in all his movements, one would have taken
him to be scarce arrived at middle-age, but for the
fact that his thick, closely-cropped hair shone a dead white
under the lamplight. His features were regular and
good, albeit they wore, in general, a rather serious
expression. Altogether, it was a strong, pleasant
face, full of energy, confidence, and the power to
command.

 As he rested one hand on the corner of the instrument,
it might be noticed that, from wrist to finger
tips, it was covered by the white cicatrices of long-healed
scars. In spite, however, of his grey hair
and disfigured hands, Captain Marion, of the Corona

, [

232 ]

Australian liner, was called by many people a handsome
man.

 ‘Sing me my favourite, please,’ asked the Captain
presently.

 ‘On condition,’ was the reply, ‘that you will tell
us a story in return.’

 ‘It’s a bargain,’ said the Captain. ‘I’ll relate
the legend of Vanderdecken, the Flying Dutchman.
Thoroughly appropriate it will be, too, as we are
just entering his domains.’

 ‘We don’t want to hear about the Flying Dutchman,’
answered the girl promptly.

 ‘Well, then,’ continued the Captain, ‘what do
you say if I tell you how I was cast away in ’69, on
the coast of—’

 ‘No, no, Captain Marion,’ interrupted she, smiling
shyly up at him, ‘we don’t want that either.’

 ‘Ah, I see!’ exclaimed the Captain, after a pause, ‘a
conspiracy! Well,’ he went on, after a still longer
hesitation, ‘I don’t care much about it. The telling,
I mean, of how I got this’ (touching his hair) ‘and
these’ (spreading out his hands), ‘for, of course, that
is what you wish to hear. It reminds me of a time I
would rather not recall.

 ‘No, Miss Hillier’—for the girl had risen in dismay
and almost tears at her thoughtlessness, and was
attempting to apologise incoherently enough—‘it
doesn’t matter a bit. Besides, I somehow feel in the
vein for story-telling this evening; and as well that as
anything else. With some passengers, I find that I [

233 ]

have to put a stopper on their curiosity rather abruptly.
But’ (with a grave smile and a bow to the group) ‘it
being a rare thing, indeed, to meet so well-assorted
and pleasant a party as we are this trip, I’ll spin
you the yarn, such as it is. And now, Miss Hillier,
my song.’

 ‘What would you like—the same as usual, I suppose—“The
Silent Land?”’

 ‘Yes,’ answered the Captain; ‘your rendering puts
a new interpretation on Salis’ words for me, and I seem
to bear with me more strongly than ever the promise, as
I listen, that he

    Who in life’s battle firm doth stand

 Shall bear Hope’s tender blossoms

 

Into the Silent Land!’







 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 ‘It is,’ commenced Captain Marion, the song finished,
and taking his accustomed seat, whilst the others
gathered round him—‘It is nearly fourteen years ago
that the strange, and what many may deem improbable,
adventure happened which I am about to
relate. I was then about twenty-two years of age, an
able-bodied seaman on board a ship called the Bucephalus

,
belonging to Liverpool. It was my first
voyage before the mast, for, although I had duly
served my apprenticeship with the firm who owned
her, and also passed my exam. as second mate, there
was no vacancy just then open. They, indeed, offered
me a post as third; but, knowing that I should be
none the worse for a month or two in the fok’s’le, I [

234 ]

preferred to ship as an A.B. The Bucephalus

was an
Eastern trader, and on this trip was bound for Singapore
and China. All went well with us until we entered
the Straits of Sunda. Then, one afternoon, the ship
lying in a dead calm off one of the many lovely islands
which abound in those narrow seas, the passengers,
chiefly military officers with their families, asked the
captain to let them have a boat and a run ashore.

 ‘He was a good-natured man, and consented.
Luckily for me, as it afterwards proved, the gig, a
very old boat, was full of lumber, fruit, fowls, etc.,
procured at Anjer, and so the life-boat, a stanch,
nearly new craft, was put into the water instead.

 ‘At the last moment some one suggested that a cup
of tea might be acceptable on the island. Not tea
alone, but provisions for an ample meal were at once
handed in, together with a keg of fresh water. This
also was, as you will discover presently, another lucky
or—ought I not to say?—providential, chance for me.

 ‘With myself, three more seamen, and eight or nine
ladies and gentlemen, we pushed off towards the verdant,
cone-shaped island. Landing without any
difficulty on a shell-strewn beach which ran up between
two lofty and abrupt headlands, all hands, except
myself and an elderly seaman known as Tom, jumped
ashore and went climbing and scampering about like
so many schoolboys out for a holiday. For my part,
I had been on scores of similar islands, or imagined I
had, and felt no particular wish to explore this one.
Neither, apparently, did my companion. So, hauling [

235 ]

off a little from the shore, we threw the grapnel overboard
and prepared to take things easy, each in his
own fashion, he with a pipe, and I with a book lent me
by one of the cabin passengers.

 ‘We made a rough sort of awning with the boat’s sail,
and I lay in the stern-sheets, my companion between
the midship thwarts, under its grateful shelter. It was
a drowsy afternoon and a very hot one. To our ears
the shouts and laughter of those ashore came at
intervals, gradually growing fainter as they made their
way towards the summit of the mountain, for such one
might say the island was.

 ‘Presently, looking up from my book, I saw that old
Tom was fast asleep, his pipe still in his mouth. Very
shortly afterwards I dozed, and heard the book drop
from my hand on to the grating without making any
effort to recover it. I fell asleep in the broad sunlit
day, between ship and land, in the motionless boat,
with the voices of my kind still in my ears, and awoke
in thickest darkness, moving swiftly along in utter
silence, save for, at times, an oily gurgle of water
under the bows. Not that I realised even so much all
at once. It took me some time. I thought I must be
still dreaming, and lay there staring into the blackness
with unbelieving eyes. Then I pinched myself and
struck my hands sharply against the thwarts. But it
was of no use. I could not convince myself that I was
not the victim of some ghastly nightmare. Then the
idea came into my mind that, although awake, I had
suddenly become blind; that Tom had gone ashore [

236 ]

for a stroll, and that the boat, drifting, had been
carried out to sea by some current. Under the influence
of this notion, I leaped to my feet, only to
be at once struck down again, as if by a hand of iron.
Although not completely stunned, I was, for a few
minutes, quite bewildered. I could feel, too, that my
head was bleeding freely. Sitting cautiously up, I
called “Tom!” TN: original has single quote I listened intently, but nothing was
audible save the faint gurgling sound of the water.
I called repeatedly, but there was no answer. Suddenly
I recollected that in my pocket was a large metal box
full of matches—long wax vestas.

 ‘Striking one, I held it aloft and gazed eagerly
about me. I thanked God that I was not blind.
But, so far as I could see, I was alone.

 ‘On each side, and a foot or so above my head,
barely visible in the feeble glimmer, were swiftly
passing walls of dripping rock, covered, in many
places, with huge TN: original reads "hugh" clusters of shiny weeds. So
amazed was I at my perfectly inexplicable situation
that I stared until the match burned my fingers and
dropped into the water, whilst I fell back quite
overcome by astonishment and fright.

 ‘Then, after a bit, I struck more matches. But
things were just the same. Always the rocky weed-grown
sides, sometimes within touch, at others seeming
to widen out; always the rocky, dripping roof,
sometimes at my head, at others out of sight; always
the darkness, the hurrying boat, and the water
like liquid pitch.

 [

237 ] 

‘Unable to see thoroughly over the boat, I presently
crawled for’ard, feeling, as I went, under the
sail which had fallen over the thwarts. As I feared,
I found no one.

 ‘Groping about, I picked up Tom’s pipe. And
then I feared the worst for him.

 ‘The darkness was horrible. It was so thick that
one seemed to swallow mouthfuls of it. The atmosphere
was close and muggy, with a smell reminding
me strongly of a tannery. Although lightly clad,
I was bathed in perspiration as I half sat, half
crouched, at the boat’s stern, straining my eyes
ahead, and now and again lighting one of my
matches. Time nor distance had any meaning for
me, now; and I have no idea how long I had
been voyaging in this unnatural fashion, when there
fell on my ears the loud threatening roar of many
waters. Commending my soul to God, I laid myself
in the boat’s bottom. The next minute she
seemed to stand nearly upright and then shoot downward
like a flash, whilst thick spray flew in showers
over me, and the imprisoned waters roared and howled
with deafening clamour adown the narrow chasm,
so narrow that more than once, in her headlong
course, I heard splinters fly from the boat’s timbers,
whilst masses of dank weeds detached by the blows
fell upon me.

 ‘I now,’ continued the Captain, after a pause,
during which he glanced from the ‘tell-tale’ compass
overhead to the attentive, wondering faces of [

238 ]

his audience—‘I now gave myself up for lost, or,
at least, imagined that I did so. But the love of
life is strong indeed within us; so that when after
shooting this subterranean cataract, or whatever it
might have been, I found my boat once more
steadily gliding along, ever with the same dull
gurgle of cleft water at her bows, a faint ray of
hope took the place of despairing calm. I was
young, remember; healthy, too, powerful and agile
beyond the common, and I felt it would be hard
indeed to die like a rat in that black hole. What
accentuated the hope I speak of was the fact that
the lessening roar of the torrent I had just passed
sounded as if directly overhead. In vain I told
myself that it was but a deceptive echo. Hope
would have her say, and buoyed me up, though
ever so little, with the idea, incredible as it seemed,
that this horrible underground river had doubled
back beneath itself, and was making for the sea
once more. It has well been said that drowning
men will clutch at straws! This one, indeed, was
soon to fail me; for presently, to my utter despair,
the noise of tumultuous waters ahead gave warning
of another cataract—another, or the same one, for,
what with the din and the darkness, I became quite
confused. The passage was a repetition of the last
one, only, if anything, rougher; and, crushed in
spirit, all courage flown, I sank back, listening to
the rush of the falling water dying away overhead
again. Was I, I wondered, descending to even [

239 ]

lower depths of earth’s bowels in this fashion, or
merely driven to and fro at the caprice of some
remorseless current in what was to prove my tomb!
I believe that, for a time, under the stress of ideas
like this, my mind wandered; for I have a vague
remembrance of singing comic songs, of shouting
defiance to fate, the darkness, and things generally;
behaving, in fact, like the lunatic I must have become.
Whether I descended any more rapids or
not I cannot say. I have no recollection whatever
of the last part of my strange journey. When,
however, I came to my sober senses again I was
at the end of it. The boat was motionless, and I
was standing upright in her.’

 At this point in the Captain’s story, and while the
interest of his hearers was at its height, the chief
officer came quietly in, and, catching his superior’s
eye, as quietly made his way out again.

 Now, four bells struck, and the Captain exclaimed,
‘What, ten o’clock already! My yarn has somewhat
spun itself out, and I’m afraid the rest must keep
for another evening.’

 At this there was quite a chorus of remonstrance.
‘It was cruel to have excited their curiosity and
leave it unsatisfied,’ was the general verdict.

 ‘No sleep for me to-night,’ said Miss Hillier; ‘I
shall be wandering through that horrid place in my
thoughts, and puzzling my brain to discover how
you got out, unless I know the sequel.’

 ‘It grieves me to think of your disturbed rest,’ [

240 ]

replied the Captain, with a bow and a quizzical
smile, ‘although honoured by the cause of it. I am
afraid, however, I must refuse even you. I saw
heavy weather just now in Mr Santley’s eye; and
the ship, you know, before all.’

 Then the sound of ropes thrown heavily on deck
was heard, together with tramp of feet and shouting,
the ship heeled over, and the Captain went out, and
was not again seen that night by his passengers.

  The Second Evening.

 Close-reefed

top-sails, with a wild, high sea, met on
‘rounding the corner,’ did not prevent the Corona’s

passengers from putting in an appearance the next
evening to hear the continuation of the Captain’s
story.

 ‘Well,’ he remarked, as he took his seat, ‘this yarn
of mine seems to bring us luck, judging by the way
we exchanged our trades last night for this rattling
westerly breeze that is now taking us round the Cape
so nicely. I think I left off my story,’ continued the
Captain, ‘as the boat came to a stop in her travels,
through the darkness.’

 ‘I had recovered from my temporary fit of madness,
and was standing up. I was trembling violently, and
my limbs felt cramped and stiff. I fancy I must have
been a long time on the journey, for I was sick and [

241 ]

faint, principally from want of food. The air, though
still heavy and warm, was not so oppressive as it had
been. But the former silence was broken by the most
unearthly noises imaginable, sobbings, deep cavernous
groans, and hoarse whistlings resounded on every side.
For a long time I did not stir. I just stood listening
with all my ears, and expecting every moment that
something awful was going to take place.

 ‘After a while, slightly reassured, and feeling the
boat’s bows scraping some hard substance, I crept into
them, and putting out my hand, and groping about
alongside, felt a mass of smooth honeycombed stone.
Striking a match, the possession of which, in my confused
state of mind, I had almost forgotten, I got hold
of the painter and took a couple of turns around a
projecting ledge of rock.

 ‘Then I scooped up a handful of water and tasted it.
It was as bitter as gall, also quite lukewarm. Happily
that in the breaker was unspoiled. Rummaging about,
I found the case of eatables also intact; and, sitting
there in profound darkness, made a meal of cheese
and white biscuits, listening between the mouthfuls
to the mysterious noises, whose origin, however, I
was now enabled pretty well to guess at.

 ‘It was very warm, and the tannery smell more
powerful than ever. A sensation of surrounding
vastness and space, however, was with me as opposed
to the confined cramped feeling of being in a narrow
channel, such as I suppose myself to have emerged
from. Now, I could stand upright and thrust an oar [

242 ]

out and upwards without touching anything; and,
shouting aloud, the sound went echoing and thundering
away over the surface of the water with reverberations
lasting for minutes.

 ‘I can take you into that place,’ continued the
Captain impressively, ‘and tell you about it as far
as my poor words will serve. But I cannot tell
you my feelings. At times I almost imagined that
I was in Hades, and that the ceaseless noises about
me were the cries and groans of lost souls therein.
At others, a wild, forlorn hope would seize me, that
it might all turn out to be only a horrible dream, and
that I should presently awake to see God’s dear sun
shining brightly on the gallant ship and the green
island once more. It had all happened with such
startling rapidity, the transformation had been so
utter and complete, that to this day I wonder I did
not become a raving madman, and so perish miserably
down there in the depths. But God in His infinite
mercy took pity upon me, and brought me at the last
out of such a prison as it is given to few men to see,
much less escape from.

 ‘Like the majority of seafarers, I, in those days,
seldom troubled my head about what is vaguely called
“religion.”

 ‘The careful and pious teachings of my childhood had
been forgotten almost wholly. But, in that awesome
place, in solitude and misery, bound with darkness of
Scripture, “that might be felt,” many things came back
to me; and, kneeling down, I clasped my hands and [

243 ]

prayed fervently that I might be saved out of the valley
of the shadow of death which encompassed me. Feeling
better and stronger, I took my sheath-knife, and with
it cut away at one of the oars until I had quite a
respectable pile of chips. Placing this on the rock
alongside, I set it on fire, and soon had the satisfaction
of seeing it blaze cheerfully up and, for a few yards, dispel
the darkness. I kept adding fuel from the same source,
with the addition of a couple of stretchers, until I had
a really good-sized fire. By its light I saw that I was
on a flat rock some twenty feet in circumference. Round
about were other islets, shaped most fantastically. One,
close to, resembled a gigantic horseshoe; another towered
up, the perfect similitude of a church spire, into the
darkness. At their bases were holes, into and through
which the water, flowing and ebbing, produced the
sounds that at first had so alarmed me. Look as I
might, I could not distinguish the way I had come in,
although I thought I could hear the steady pouring of a
volume of water not far away. Breaking off a lump of
the stone on which I sat, I examined it closely, and felt
pretty certain that it was lava. I had seen such before
at Mauna Loa, in the Sandwich Islands.

 ‘Was I then in the womb of a volcano, extinct just
at present, doubtless; but, perhaps, even now, taking
in water preparatory to generating steam and becoming
active? Somewhere in my reading I had dropped
across an article on seismology, and one of the theories
put forward came to mind as above.

 ‘The idea made my flesh creep!

 [

244 ] 

‘I seemed to feel the air, the water, and my lump of
lava getting hotter and hotter.

 ‘Hopeless as my case appeared, and almost resigned
to face the end as I had become, even so, I did by no
means relish a private view of the preliminaries to a
volcanic eruption.

 ‘Strangely inconsistent, you will say, but so it was.
When face to face, even with the last scene of all, it
seems there can yet be something of which one may be
afraid.

 ‘Meanwhile, my beacon blazed up brightly, and,
peering around, I presently made out a pile of stuff
apparently floating against the base of one of the
nearest islets.

 ‘Taking a flaring fire-stick, I got into the boat and
sculled over to it. It was a heap of driftwood. Lowering
my torch to examine the stuff more closely, I nearly
pitched overboard, as, out of the reddish-black water
within the ragged patch of light, a white, dead face
gazed up at me with wide-open, staring eyes. I
recognised it at once as that of my old shipmate.
Tom, on awaking, had evidently been knocked out of
the boat and drowned, as so nearly happened to myself.
The current had as evidently carried him here with
me.

 ‘I leaned over the gunwale as if fascinated. What
would I not have given for his living companionship
now!

 ‘Lifting, at last, one of the stiff arms, I shook the
unresponsive hand in silent farewell, and paddled back [

245 ]

towards the flame that marked my islet, actually feeling
envious of the quiet corpse. Misfortune makes us
sadly selfish, and so little had my thoughts ran on the
fate of my comrade that the shock of his appearance
thus was a heavy one.

 ‘I took it as a bad omen, and what spirit I had
nearly left me.

 ‘After sitting motionless on my rock for a very long
time, with my head bowed on my knees, and nearly
letting my fire go out, I shook myself together a little,
threw more chips on, and examined my stores.

 ‘All told, with cheese, biscuits, several tins of potted
meat and preserves, I reckoned there was enough, on
meagre allowance, to last me for a week. Water about
the same.

 ‘More than once I felt tempted to throw the lot
overboard and follow it.

 ‘But youth and health and strength are indeed
wondrous things, and a man possessed of them will do
and dare much before giving up entirely, no matter how
drear the outlook, how sharp the arrows of fate which
transfix him!

 ‘Feeling weary and fagged, I lay down in the boat
and slept, I suppose, for hours very soundly.

 ‘The awaking was bad—worse even than the first
time.

 ‘One thing comforted me somewhat. I found that
by the constant endeavour to use my eyes in the darkness
I was becoming able to discern at least the dim
outlines of objects.

 [

246 ] 

‘Renewing the fire with a lot of driftwood I picked
up at the further side of my islet, I proceeded to carry
out a plan I had formed. Taking the gratings out of
the stern-sheets, I arranged them firmly in the bows.
Then, breaking off projecting lumps and knobs of lava,
I beat them smaller with an iron pin, which I fortunately
found in the boat, and spread them thickly over
the gratings, thus forming a sort of stage. Upon this I
built a substantial fire. I was, you see, bound on a
voyage of exploration.

 ‘There might, possibly, be some avenue to freedom
out of this subterranean sea other than the one I had
entered it from, exit by which was, of course, hopeless.

 ‘It was, I argued, useless to stay on the rock. I
could not be much worse off, no matter where I
got to.

 ‘How I yearned and hungered for light no tongue
could tell. It seemed so hard to wander in the gloom
for a brief night of existence. And then, the end!
Do you, any of you, wonder at my hair turning
grey?

 ‘As I scraped the last embers off the islet on to the
tin dish used as a baler, in order to throw them on the
new fire, , which, to
all appearance, had just floated alongside.

 ‘My nerves were evidently getting unstrung by what
I had gone through, for, letting the dish fall, I shouted
with terror, and, jumping into the boat, pushed wildly
away from the poor body. To my unutterable dismay [

247 ]

it followed me, with one arm extended and raised
slightly, as if in deprecation of my desertion
of it.

 ‘I have thought at times,’ remarked the Captain
parenthetically, ‘of what a picture the scene would
make—the boat floating in a patch of crimson water,
with the fire flaring into the blackness on her bows,
myself standing up grasping an oar, and gazing intently
at the nearly nude body as it came closer and closer,
and everywhere around the thick darkness.

 ‘I think that in another moment I should have leapt
overboard, so great was my fright, but that I happened
to catch sight of a piece of rope leading from the boat
to the body.

 ‘Getting hold of it, I pulled, and the corpse came
also. Then I understood. On my leaving it the first
time a portion of the sail halliards, which had been
towing overhead, had got foul of the body, and,
unperceived, I had brought it back to my islet with
me.

 ‘My presence of mind returned, and, not caring to
run the risk of more surprises of the sort, I again
landed, and pulled the body on to the islet.

 ‘There must have been some preserving agent in that
water, for, despite the heat, there was no sign of
decomposition, and the features were as fresh as in
life.

 ‘Sculling gently along, with my fire blazing bravely
and comfortingly at the bow, I set off into the
unknown.

 [

248 ] 

‘For a time my attention was thoroughly taken up in
trying to avoid the numerous lava islets, whose presence
I could scarcely detect until right upon them. Indeed,
once or twice we bumped heavily enough to send
showers of hot ashes hissing into the water.

 ‘At last, after a long spell of this kind of blind
navigation, I seemed to get clearer of these provoking
islets. The noises also, to which I was becoming
quite accustomed, nearly ceased.

 ‘As I sculled warily along, I listened with all my
ears for some indication of a return current. It
was my one hope, and it kept every sense on the
alert.

 ‘But the water within the radius of my so limited
vision was quiet and still as in a covered reservoir—much
more so, now, indeed, than at my old resting-place.
This fact I accounted for by the emptying
near there of the underground, possibly under-sea
river, which had brought me into such an awful fix.

 ‘Presently the boat bumped more violently than
ever, and by the flame-light which shot up from the
disturbed fire, I saw, rising far aloft, a solid wall
of rock. No lava islet this, but the end of all—the
boundary, in this direction, of my prison.

 ‘To right and left stretched the same grim barrier,
dropping sheer down into the still black water. With
a sinking heart I turned the boat’s head along the
wall to my right hand, keeping a little distance out,
moving very slowly, with just a turn or two of the
oar, sufficient only to keep way on her.

  [

248a ] 

[Illustration:

The light fell full upon the corpse. ( .) ]



 [

249 ] 

‘It may have been minutes, or it may have been
hours, when, straight ahead, over the somewhat feeble
light of my fire, which had proved, after all, more
help by way of company than use, I imagined the
darkness looked thinner. Inspired by the mere idea,
I sculled vigorously along, at the risk of complete
wreck from some sunken rock, and in a short time
the boat shot into an oblong-shaped streak of light—light,
that is, comparatively, for it was as dim as
starlight; although, so acclimatised, if I may use the
term, had my eyes become to the denser medium,
that by its aid I could see clearly every article in
the boat.

 ‘I will not trouble you with a description of my
feelings, nor of all the extravagancies I committed in the
first flush of delighted hope that had visited me. I
seemed to be once more in touch with the upper
world through that column of dim greyness ascending
through the darkness, and so weak as hardly to
be able to conquer it.’

 Here the Captain paused. He had told his story
well; seldom at a loss for a word, and with now
and again, but rarely, an appropriate gesture.

 So successful had he been in gaining the attention
of his listeners, that, when he ceased, they sat quite
silent, gazing at him fixedly, and for some minutes
no one spoke.

 Then four bells, which struck on deck during a
lull in the roar of the gale, came with such sudden [

250 ]

distinctness to their ears, as to make some of the ladies
start and utter timid little ejaculations.

 The spell broken, a chorus of tongues clamoured
out. Miss Hillier alone was silent. Then some dear
foolish female affinity said, ‘Why, Amy, love, you’ve
been crying!’ This the girl, with flaming cheeks
denied, only the next minute to affirm, quite inconsequently,
that if she had wept (which she was certain
she had not), was not such a tale enough to make
one, with any heart at all, shed tears?

  The Third Evening.

 East

by S-½-South, under fore and main courses
and upper and lower top-sails, sped the Corona

with
the wind on her quarter. Aft, rose great water-hills,
darkly green, with white crests, seeming, as each
followed each, to hang momentarily suspended over
the stern and threaten to overwhelm everything; then,
as the good ship rose just in the nick of time,
breaking with a long surge in sheets of milky foam
away for’ard.

 The sun was setting sullenly behind a dense cloud-bank TN: OED hyphenates .
An albatross or two flew screaming from one
wave-crest to another right in the wake. It was a
typical evening in the Southern Ocean, the long
wash of whose seas reach from the foot of Cape
Leuwin to the rugged cliffs of Fuego.

 [

251 ] 

‘Well,’ continued the Captain, without any preface,
as he took his seat facing the waiting and expectant
little party.

 ‘Well, stare as I might aloft, I could not discover
to where this Jacob’s ladder led. You see, at its best,
it was only a column of dusky twilight, and the
further end, from where I stood, was lost to view. As
I gazed, it appeared to be gradually fading away.
I rubbed my eyes; and when I again looked, all
around was blacker than the blackest midnight,
except where my fire still burned. For a while, I
was puzzled to account for the disappearance of the
light. Then the thought struck me that it might
be caused by the fall of night in the upper world.
Was I, I wondered, as I turned sadly to my fire,
ever again to look upon the bright day, the sun,
the moon, the stars, and all the wonders of that fair
earth now grown so dear to me? Truly was I one
of those unhappy men who, as the Psalmist says,
“sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being
bound in affliction and iron.”

 ‘Close to the pillar of light, just on its outside
edge, I had noticed a long, slender, almost perpendicular
pinnacle of lava towering upwards like the
spire of a church.

 ‘At the base of this I securely moored my boat.
Then, thinking that a cup of tea would cheer me up
a little, I brewed one, and made a good meal. After
this, lying down, I pondered many things, gazing
always aloft.

 [

252 ] 

‘Once I imagined I saw a star; but it disappeared
before I could make sure.

 ‘The one question uppermost in my mind was
whether or not the glimmer would reappear when
the morning broke above, or had it been an illusion?
One thing encouraged me to hope for the best. It
was perceptibly cooler, a grateful change from the
warm mugginess I had encountered everywhere else.
I had, by this, contracted a habit of talking aloud,
and I presently caught myself saying that I would
climb the lava pinnacle in the morning and try to
get a better look-out.

 ‘“In the morning.”

 ‘The utter vanity of the so familiar phrase as it
fell on my ears struck me with all the force of
some terrible shock, whilst the cold deadening thought
seized upon me that, for me, in this world, there
was to be no more morning. Through darkness was
I to make the last journey towards that dread bourne
whence no traveller returns? The slow death in the
darkness, drifting about on the bitter waters of that
secret sea—that was the thought that my soul revolted
from. And strange thoughts, horrible thoughts, a
man thinks placed as I was. At times his reason
leaves him, his whole soul rises in impious revolt,
and the devil rages freely therein, as if already his
victim’s bed were made in hell.

 ‘But, thanks be to God!’ exclaimed the Captain,
fervently, ‘that the recollections of that hideous time—of
the fits of doubt and despair and terror and [

253 ]

madness, of which I have said but little to you—grow
dimmer and weaker with the years, leaving
only in enduring relief the memory of a great mercy!

 ‘It pleased me, though, unproved as it was, that
notion of being able to distinguish between night
and daylight. The very fact, pure conjecture though
it might be, of having the power to say, “Night has
come,” seemed to bring peace to my wearied eyes;
so that I presently lay down and slept dreamlessly,
and on awakening found again, to my intense joy,
that mild, soft haze falling upon me.

 ‘Scarcely giving myself time to snatch a mouthful
of biscuit and a draught of cold tea, I jumped ashore
and commenced the ascent of the tapering mass of
rock. It was, as I have said, nearly perpendicular,
and there was no lack of foot and hand-holds—projections
sharp as razors, formed by the drippings
of the once molten lava. Thanks to my trained vision
and the help afforded by the close proximity of the
light, I could see dimly. Higher up, the projecting
spurs and knobs grew scarcer, and the surface more
smooth and slippery. It was terrible work. At home
I had had some practice as a cragsman, and this
stood to me well now. As I climbed, sometimes vertically,
at others spirally, wherever I could feel the firmest
hold, the atmosphere grew palpably clearer, and this
infused new strength into my aching limbs as I
crawled upwards, now hanging by one bleeding hand
over the abyss beneath me, now with both hands
breathlessly embracing some sharp spur that cut into [

254 ]

my flesh, whilst my feet groped convulsively for
precarious support.

 ‘When just about spent, I unexpectedly came to the
top. I found only room enough there to sit down and
pant. A wild hope had filled my breast that this rocky
ladder would lead me to liberty—a hope growing
stronger with every upward step. As I looked around,
these hopes fell, and the old leaden weight of despair
seemed to settle once more upon my soul. Slanting
away from me on every side, stretched the rugged
acclivities of a vast amphitheatre, converging again
towards its summit, where the blue sky was distinctly
visible. Picture to yourselves an hour-glass with a long
tunnel-like waist. Place a straw, the end of which rests
on the bottom of the lower section of the glass and
reaches up through the tunnel until just on a level
with the sloping-upward portion of the top section, but
touching it nowhere. Now place a minute insect
on the very tip of the straw, and you have my situation
as nearly as I can explain it to you. And there I
crouched on my lava straw, stretching out unavailing
hands to those scarred cliffs of liberty, betwixt me and
which spread that dark abyss, with the mournful waters
of the bitter sea at its foot. The distance between
where I sat on the top of the pinnacle and the sloping
walls of the crater all round must have been about
twenty five feet. I think it was afterwards measured as
that. A hundred plans darted swiftly into my mind for
crossing this little space, which meant so much to me,
only to be as quickly dismissed as impracticable.

 [

255 ] 

‘Although still very far from day, it was yet light
enough to let me see that the sides of the crater,
nearly equi-distant around my perch, were cut and
ploughed into deep furrows, and that, once there, I
should have comparatively little trouble in reaching
upper air.

 ‘Would it be possible, I wondered, to splice what
remained of the oars together, and thus make some
kind of a bridge along which to creep? But the idea
of again facing such a climb with such an unwieldy
burden made me shudder. Also, I doubted much if
there was length enough to reach across, supposing I
ever got them to where I was. This one amongst
many other plans. All at once, as I sat gazing alternately
at the far, far away patch of blue overhead, and
the dark rocks opposite, there flashed across my thoughts
the recollection of the boat’s grapnel. I had seen
nothing of it. But it might still be hanging under her
bows. Attached to the stern-post by a short length of
chain shackled to a ring-bolt, it would have taken a
heavy shock to shift it. If I could but get a line
across and, by help of the grapnel, firmly secured to
the opposite side, I felt I was saved. Tearing up the
light dungaree jumper I was wearing, and which, with
the remainder of my clothing, was little else but a rag,
I bound pieces around my stiff and wounded hands
and feet, and commenced the descent. It was an awful
journey, worse than the coming up. Then, my skin was
whole, at the start, anyhow; now, the cuts and tears
re-opened and bled and stung more than ever. At one [

256 ]

time, indeed, I felt that I must give up and let go.
But the thought of the grapnel appeared to endue me
with fresh strength, whilst, in my mind’s eye, I kept
steadfastly the memory of that dear glimpse of blue sky.
At length, looking down and pausing for a moment,
I saw a flicker of light. It was from the dying embers
of my fire, and, in a few minutes, I was in the boat.
Although nearly utterly exhausted, crawling for’ard, I
felt for the chain. It was there; and pulling it rapidly
in, what was my delight to find the little grapnel still at
its end. Replenishing my fire, I made some tea, preparatory
to having something to eat, for I knew I should
want all my strength presently. In hauling at the chain
my hands had got wet, and, to my surprise, the bleeding
had ceased, and the pain almost departed. I immediately
bathed my feet, and felt wonderfully relieved
thereby. Now, I had my tea, and then considered
whether it might not be wiser to pass the night where I
was, and take a full day for my attempt. God knows
how eager I was for the moment of trial to arrive!
Still, I chose the prudent side, and sat and watched
the hazy column turn first to a dull green, then to
ashen grey, then go out suddenly, and so I knew,
certainly now, that the day was over on the earth.

 ‘As the darkness, thick and impenetrable, closed me
in, I lay down thinking to sleep a little, but my rest
was disturbed and broken. Always, as I dozed off, I
was clambering painfully up that terrible rock, with
bleeding hands and feet, staggering under huge burdens
of rope and iron. Once I dreamt that my shipmate’s [

257 ]

body had floated off the islet, and was, even now, with
white clammy fingers, striving to lift itself into the boat,
whilst the ghastly face peered at me over the side. This
effectually awoke me; but so strong was the impression,
that I seized a fire-stick, and, making it blaze up,
searched sharply around. I had my trouble for my
pains. But further attempt at sleep for me was out of
the question.

 ‘My dawn, such as it was, came at last. I had
already detached TN: original reads "detatched" the grapnel from its chain, and
unrove the halliards from the mast. These last I
wound round and round my body, fully thirty feet of
line, small “Europe” rope, but tough and strong.
The disposal of my precious grapnel, which, luckily,
was one of the smallest of its kind, only used, as we
had used it, for a temporary holdfast, bothered me
a good deal.

 ‘Finally, I placed my head between two of the
flukes, one of which then rested on each shoulder,
whilst the stock hung down my back, swinging loosely.
To make sure of the flukes not slipping, I passed a
piece of line from one to the other, and knotted it
securely.

 ‘It was a most uncomfortable fixture altogether, a
tight fit for my neck into the bargain, but I could
think of no other way.

 ‘I’m not going to inflict upon you a detailed description
of how I reached the top—I believe it must
have been fully five hundred feet—carrying that half-hundred
weight of iron, to say nothing of the rope. [

258 ]

Indeed, I hardly know myself. However, get there
I did; but, as you may guess, in a very evil plight.

 ‘I recollect, when still some thirty feet from the
top, unable to bear any longer the horrible chafing
of the flukes, which had broken through the skin,
and were grinding against the bone, that I rested,
or, rather, balanced myself on a sharp ledge, whilst
casting the grapnel adrift from my shoulders, and
unwinding the rope from my body. Then, making
one end of the line fast to the ring in the stock,
I fastened the other round my waist, the grapnel all
this time resting loosely on the rock.

 ‘Leaving it there, and paying out the line cautiously
into the void below me, away I went again, bracing
myself at every step to withstand the awful jerk should
the grapnel slip off, and tighten the rope with the
momentum of its fall. If such a thing had happened,
and the chances were many, my fate was certain—a
few scrambling clutches and annihilation. But where
it went I had made up my mind to go also.

 ‘It was my only and last hope, that bit of crooked
four-clawed iron! Death was in every step I took,
and I believe that it was in those last few feet that
my hair turned its colour, so terrible was the suspense
and expectation.

 ‘But God was very good to me, and I reached
the summit with a couple of feet of line to spare.
Dragging the grapnel up, I crouched down on the
little flat, table-like top, and fairly sobbed with pain
and exhaustion.

 [

259 ] 

‘To my alarm, I felt myself growing weaker instead
of stronger from my rest. The fact was that, with
the awful cutting about I had received, I had lost
a good deal of blood. Many of the deeper cuts
on my hands and arms were bleeding still. Evidently
there was no time to lose. Standing up, feeling
sick and dizzy, I coiled down my line for a fair
throw, and, grasping it some three feet or so above
the grapnel, swung it to and fro until I thought impetus
enough was attained, then hove with all my remaining
strength.

 ‘I shut my eyes, expecting to hear every second
the sound of iron clanging far beneath against the
sides of the pinnacle. When I opened them again, the
line was hanging in a slack bight across the chasm.
The little anchor had fallen directly into one of the
deep furrows, but perilously close to the edge. With
trembling fingers I hauled the line in. Tighter,
tighter, tighter still, then with all the force I could
command. Would it support the weight of my body,
or would it come?

 ‘Without staying to argue the question, I made it
fast afresh to a round nob, the only one on the place.
Then, saying a short prayer, and taking a last glance
at the blue sky, I let myself slip gently off the rock,
hanging with my hands on the thin, hempen line.

 ‘It sagged terribly. I could plainly hear my heart
knocking and thumping against my ribs. It sagged
and “gave” still more. Imagining that I heard the
noise of the grapnel scraping and dragging, I looked [

260 ]

upon myself as lost. But I still continued to drag
myself across. It was a long, terrible agony, and,
more than once, I thought I should have to let go.
My hands almost refused to close upon the rope. But
I still, almost as in a dream, worked myself along.
Once I caught myself wondering if I should fall into
or near the boat, and whether the dead man would be
there to receive me. Then a horrible fancy seized
me that I was making no progress, but that my
hands were glued to the rope with blood—ever in
the same spot. Then suddenly, in my now mechanical
motions, my head hit with great violence against
rock. This effectually aroused me. I was at the
threshold of liberty—the edge of the crater, where it
sloped quickly away below.

 ‘I hung there whilst one might count twenty, looking
up. I was three feet beneath the rim. The rope
had given that much.

 ‘I don’t remember in the least pulling myself
up and over that overhanging ledge. When my
senses returned, I was lying in the furrow alongside
the grapnel, and a rush of cold water was sweeping
under me. How long I had been there I have
no notion. Certainly a great many hours. The rain
was pouring down in tropical torrents; thunder pealed
above me, and the lightning flashed and darted in
vain endeavour to pierce the lower abyss.

 ‘After many fruitless attempts, I staggered to my
feet. I felt so dreadfully weak and faint that I thought
I was about to die. But a glance aloft gave me fresh [

261 ]

heart. The dark clouds of the thunderstorm were
passing over, and full upon my nearly naked body
fell the warm rays of the glorious sun. I almost
at that moment, Parsee-like, worshipped him.

 ‘Painfully, stumbling at every step, I crawled upwards,
with many a rest and draught of the rain
water, caught in rocky hollows, until, after a weary
time, and feeling as one risen from the tomb, I
emerged into the full light of day once more.

 ‘Naked, bleeding, bruised, but free, I stood on the
topmost peak of that fateful island. At first everything
swam before my vision. Trees, the ocean,
the far horizon, reeled and shook, advanced and receded
to my dazzled eyes. The sun was low in
the heavens. As things gradually assumed their natural
appearance, I became conscious of a great ship lying
at anchor, of a cluster of white tents not a hundred
yards away from me.

 ‘But of these things, for a space, I took no heed.
Sun, air, water and sky held my regards in ecstasy.
I drank the beauty and the newness of them in till
my soul was saturated with the tender loveliness of
that nature to which I had been for so long a stranger.
Then, and not till then, I tottered towards the clump
of tents lying just below me.

 ‘Men were there, carpenters apparently, hammering at
a tall wooden structure. Other men—men-o’-war seamen
by their rig—were arriving and departing with
burdens.

 ‘I was close upon them before they saw me. Some [

262 ]

shrank back. One, I recollect, picked up a rifle and
brought it to his shoulder. A man with a gold epaulette
on his coat struck it up and spoke to the sailor in
English.

 ‘Presently I was taken into a tent, a doctor appeared
from somewhere, and, whilst he dressed my wounds,
they gave me a cordial, and I told my story with
what seemed to me like the voice of a stranger. I
don’t remember much afterwards until I awoke, swinging
in a hammock under a shady tree close to the
tents.

 ‘I was a mass of bandages, but sensible, though
terribly weak.

 ‘“You’ve had a narrow escape of brain fever, my lad,”
said the doctor. “But we’ve pulled you through
all right. Lucky we happened to be here, though,
wasn’t it? A nice time you must have had down there.
We found your rope; but our men didn’t care about
venturing any further, as steam was beginning to
come up.”

 ‘“Four days,” replied the doctor, in answer to my
question, “it is since you appeared on the scene and
scared the camp.

 ‘“The Bucephalus

? Yes, curiously enough, we met
her just entering Singapore Harbour. That’s ten days
ago. She spoke us, and asked us to keep a look-out for
her boat with two seamen. We have one of them, at all
events. I suppose the other poor beggar will be thrown
up presently.”

 ‘I looked at him. “Yes,” he continued, “the old [

263 ]

volcano is showing every indication of renewed activity.
We came here to observe the transit of Venus, but shall
have probably to pack up and form another station if
those symptoms don’t subside. See there!”

 ‘Looking in the direction of his outstretched finger, I
saw several tall puffs of what seemed like white smoke
issuing from the depths of the crater.

 ‘ TN: opening quote invisible The observers were loth to shift their quarters; but,
when some red-hot cinders from below set one of the
tents on fire, they accepted the hint.

 ‘Still in my hammock, I was presently carried down
the mountain and on board H.M.S. Hygeia

, where, with
careful and skilled attention, I soon recovered.’

 The Captain ceased speaking. For a time nothing
was heard except the steady blast of the ‘Roaring
Forties’ overhead.

 Asked a passenger presently,—

 ‘And did the volcano really explode after all?’

 ‘It did, indeed,’ replied Captain Marion; ‘but not
for a month afterwards, and then so fiercely as to scatter
death and destruction throughout those narrow seas,
grinding the island of Krakatoa itself into cosmic dust—visible,
according to scientists, nearly all over the
world.’

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 Here ends the story proper as compiled from the notes
taken by one of the passengers and jotted down in his
cabin of a night as the Captain finished each section of
his narrative.

 Lower down on the last pages of these notes is [

264 ]

gummed, however, a printed paragraph, cut from a
Sydney daily newspaper, which runs as follows:—

 Marion—Hillier.

—On the 29th ultimo, at St James’s Church
of England, Sydney, by the Rev. R. Garnsey, George Wreford
Marion, master in the British Mercantile Marine, to Amy Margaret,
daughter of the late John Hillier, Esq., of Pevensey, Miller’s
Point, Sydney, and Eurella and Whydah stations, Riverina,
N.S.W.