TOMBSTONES

 The five friends had finished dinner, five men of the world, mature, rich,
      three married, the two others bachelors. They met like this every month in
      memory of their youth, and after dinner they chatted until two o'clock in
      the morning. Having remained intimate friends, and enjoying each other's
      society, they probably considered these the pleasantest evenings of their
      lives. They talked on every subject, especially of what interested and
      amused Parisians. Their conversation was, as in the majority of salons
      elsewhere, a verbal rehash of what they had read in the morning papers.

 One of the most lively of them was Joseph de Bardon, a celibate living the
      Parisian life in its fullest and most whimsical manner. He was not a
      debauche nor depraved, but a singular, happy fellow, still young, for he
      was scarcely forty. A man of the world in its widest and best sense,
      gifted with a brilliant, but not profound, mind, with much varied
      knowledge, but no true erudition, ready comprehension without true
      understanding, he drew from his observations, his adventures, from
      everything he saw, met with and found, anecdotes at once comical and
      philosophical, and made humorous remarks that gave him a great reputation
      for cleverness in society.

 He was the after dinner speaker and had his own story each time, upon
      which they counted, and he talked without having to be coaxed.

 As he sat smoking, his elbows on the table, a petit verre half full beside
      his plate, half torpid in an atmosphere of tobacco blended with steaming
      coffee, he seemed to be perfectly at home. He said between two whiffs:

 “A curious thing happened to me some time ago.”

 “Tell it to us,” they all exclaimed at once.

 “With pleasure. You know that I wander about Paris a great deal,
      like book collectors who ransack book stalls. I just look at the sights,
      at the people, at all that is passing by and all that is going on.

 “Toward the middle of September—it was beautiful weather—I
      went out one afternoon, not knowing where I was going. One always has a
      vague wish to call on some pretty woman or other. One chooses among them
      in one's mental picture gallery, compares them in one's mind, weighs the
      interest with which they inspire you, their comparative charms and finally
      decides according to the influence of the day. But when the sun is very
      bright and the air warm, it takes away from you all desire to make calls.

 “The sun was bright, the air warm. I lighted a cigar and sauntered
      aimlessly along the outer boulevard. Then, as I strolled on, it occurred
      to me to walk as far as Montmartre and go into the cemetery.

 “I am very fond of cemeteries. They rest me and give me a feeling of
      sadness; I need it. And, besides, I have good friends in there, those that
      one no longer goes to call on, and I go there from time to time.

 “It is in this cemetery of Montmartre that is buried a romance of my
      life, a sweetheart who made a great impression on me, a very emotional,
      charming little woman whose memory, although it causes me great sorrow,
      also fills me with regrets—regrets of all kinds. And I go to dream
      beside her grave. She has finished with life.

 “And then I like cemeteries because they are immense cities filled
      to overflowing with inhabitants. Think how many dead people there are in
      this small space, think of all the generations of Parisians who are housed
      there forever, veritable troglodytes enclosed in their little vaults, in
      their little graves covered with a stone or marked by a cross, while
      living beings take up so much room and make so much noise —imbeciles
      that they are!

 “Then, again, in cemeteries there are monuments almost as
      interesting as in museums. The tomb of Cavaignac reminded me, I must
      confess without making any comparison, of the chef d'oeuvre of Jean
      Goujon: the recumbent statue of Louis de Breze in the subterranean chapel
      of the Cathedral of Rouen. All modern and realistic art has originated
      there, messieurs. This dead man, Louis de Breze, is more real, more
      terrible, more like inanimate flesh still convulsed with the death agony
      than all the tortured corpses that are distorted to-day in funeral
      monuments.

 “But in Montmartre one can yet admire Baudin's monument, which has a
      degree of grandeur; that of Gautier, of Murger, on which I saw the other
      day a simple, paltry wreath of immortelles, yellow immortelles, brought
      thither by whom? Possibly by the last grisette, very old and now janitress
      in the neighborhood. It is a pretty little statue by Millet, but ruined by
      dirt and neglect. Sing of youth, O Murger!

 “Well, there I was in Montmartre Cemetery, and was all at once
      filled with sadness, a sadness that is not all pain, a kind of sadness
      that makes you think when you are in good health, 'This place is not
      amusing, but my time has not come yet.'

 “The feeling of autumn, of the warm moisture which is redolent of
      the death of the leaves, and the weakened, weary, anaemic sun increased,
      while rendering it poetical, the sensation of solitude and of finality
      that hovered over this spot which savors of human mortality.

 “I walked along slowly amid these streets of tombs, where the
      neighbors do not visit each other, do not sleep together and do not read
      the newspapers. And I began to read the epitaphs. That is the most amusing
      thing in the world. Never did Labiche or Meilhac make me laugh as I have
      laughed at the comical inscriptions on tombstones. Oh, how much superior
      to the books of Paul de Kock for getting rid of the spleen are these
      marble slabs and these crosses where the relatives of the deceased have
      unburdened their sorrow, their desires for the happiness of the vanished
      ones and their hope of rejoining them—humbugs!

 “But I love above all in this cemetery the deserted portion,
      solitary, full of great yews and cypresses, the older portion, belonging
      to those dead long since, and which will soon be taken into use again; the
      growing trees nourished by the human corpses cut down in order to bury in
      rows beneath little slabs of marble those who have died more recently.

 “When I had sauntered about long enough to refresh my mind I felt
      that I would soon have had enough of it and that I must place the faithful
      homage of my remembrance on my little friend's last resting place. I felt
      a tightening of the heart as I reached her grave. Poor dear, she was so
      dainty, so loving and so white and fresh—and now—if one should
      open the grave—

 “Leaning over the iron grating, I told her of my sorrow in a low
      tone, which she doubtless did not hear, and was moving away when I saw a
      woman in black, in deep mourning, kneeling on the next grave. Her crape
      veil was turned back, uncovering a pretty fair head, the hair in Madonna
      bands looking like rays of dawn beneath her sombre headdress. I stayed.

 “Surely she must be in profound grief. She had covered her face with
      her hands and, standing there in meditation, rigid as a statue, given up
      to her grief, telling the sad rosary of her remembrances within the shadow
      of her concealed and closed eyes, she herself seemed like a dead person
      mourning another who was dead. All at once a little motion of her back,
      like a flutter of wind through a willow, led me to suppose that she was
      going to cry. She wept softly at first, then louder, with quick motions of
      her neck and shoulders. Suddenly she uncovered her eyes. They were full of
      tears and charming, the eyes of a bewildered woman, with which she glanced
      about her as if awaking from a nightmare. She looked at me, seemed abashed
      and hid her face completely in her hands. Then she sobbed convulsively,
      and her head slowly bent down toward the marble. She leaned her forehead
      on it, and her veil spreading around her, covered the white corners of the
      beloved tomb, like a fresh token of mourning. I heard her sigh, then she
      sank down with her cheek on the marble slab and remained motionless,
      unconscious.

 “I darted toward her, slapped her hands, blew on her eyelids, while
      I read this simple epitaph: 'Here lies Louis-Theodore Carrel, Captain of
      Marine Infantry, killed by the enemy at Tonquin. Pray for him.'

 “He had died some months before. I was affected to tears and
      redoubled my attentions. They were successful. She regained consciousness.
      I appeared very much moved. I am not bad looking, I am not forty. I saw by
      her first glance that she would be polite and grateful. She was, and amid
      more tears she told me her history in detached fragments as well as her
      gasping breath would allow, how the officer was killed at Tonquin when
      they had been married a year, how she had married him for love, and being
      an orphan, she had only the usual dowry.

 “I consoled her, I comforted her, raised her and lifted her on her
      feet. Then I said:

 “'Do not stay here. Come.'

 “'I am unable to walk,' she murmured.

 “'I will support you.'

 “'Thank you, sir; you are good. Did you also come to mourn for some
      one?'

 “'Yes, madame.'

 “'A dead friend?'

 “'Yes, madame.'

 “'Your wife?'

 “'A friend.'

 “'One may love a friend as much as they love their wife. Love has no
      law.'

 “'Yes, madame.'

 “And we set off together, she leaning on my arm, while I almost
      carried her along the paths of the cemetery. When we got outside she
      faltered:

 “'I feel as if I were going to be ill.'

 “'Would you like to go in anywhere, to take something?'

 “'Yes, monsieur.'

 “I perceived a restaurant, one of those places where the mourners of
      the dead go to celebrate the funeral. We went in. I made her drink a cup
      of hot tea, which seemed to revive her. A faint smile came to her lips.
      She began to talk about herself. It was sad, so sad to be always alone in
      life, alone in one's home, night and day, to have no one on whom one can
      bestow affection, confidence, intimacy.

 “That sounded sincere. It sounded pretty from her mouth. I was
      touched. She was very young, perhaps twenty. I paid her compliments, which
      she took in good part. Then, as time was passing, I suggested taking her
      home in a carriage. She accepted, and in the cab we sat so close that our
      shoulders touched.

 “When the cab stopped at her house she murmured: 'I do not feel
      equal to going upstairs alone, for I live on the fourth floor. You have
      been so good. Will you let me take your arm as far as my own door?'

 “I agreed with eagerness. She ascended the stairs slowly, breathing
      hard. Then, as we stood at her door, she said:

 “'Come in a few moments so that I may thank you.'

 “And, by Jove, I went in. Everything was modest, even rather poor,
      but simple and in good taste.

 “We sat down side by side on a little sofa and she began to talk
      again about her loneliness. She rang for her maid, in order to offer me
      some wine. The maid did not come. I was delighted, thinking that this maid
      probably came in the morning only, what one calls a charwoman.

 “She had taken off her hat. She was really pretty, and she gazed at
      me with her clear eyes, gazed so hard and her eyes were so clear that I
      was terribly tempted. I caught her in my arms and rained kisses on her
      eyelids, which she closed suddenly.

 “She freed herself and pushed me away, saying:

 “'Have done, have done.'

 “But I next kissed her on the mouth and she did not resist, and as
      our glances met after thus outraging the memory of the captain killed in
      Tonquin, I saw that she had a languid, resigned expression that set my
      mind at rest.

 “I became very attentive and, after chatting for some time, I said:

 “'Where do you dine?'

 “'In a little restaurant in the neighborhood:

 “'All alone?'

 “'Why, yes.'

 “'Will you dine with me?'

 “'Where?'

 “'In a good restaurant on the Boulevard.'

 “She demurred a little. I insisted. She yielded, saying by way of
      apology to herself: 'I am so lonely—so lonely.' Then she added:

 “'I must put on something less sombre, and went into her bedroom.
      When she reappeared she was dressed in half-mourning, charming, dainty and
      slender in a very simple gray dress. She evidently had a costume for the
      cemetery and one for the town.

 “The dinner was very enjoyable. She drank some champagne, brightened
      up, grew lively and I went home with her.

 “This friendship, begun amid the tombs, lasted about three weeks.
      But one gets tired of everything, especially of women. I left her under
      pretext of an imperative journey. She made me promise that I would come
      and see her on my return. She seemed to be really rather attached to me.

 “Other things occupied my attention, and it was about a month before
      I thought much about this little cemetery friend. However, I did not
      forget her. The recollection of her haunted me like a mystery, like a
      psychological problem, one of those inexplicable questions whose solution
      baffles us.

 “I do not know why, but one day I thought I might possibly meet her
      in the Montmartre Cemetery, and I went there.

 “I walked about a long time without meeting any but the ordinary
      visitors to this spot, those who have not yet broken off all relations
      with their dead. The grave of the captain killed at Tonquin had no mourner
      on its marble slab, no flowers, no wreath.

 “But as I wandered in another direction of this great city of the
      dead I perceived suddenly, at the end of a narrow avenue of crosses, a
      couple in deep mourning walking toward me, a man and a woman. Oh, horrors!
      As they approached I recognized her. It was she!

 “She saw me, blushed, and as I brushed past her she gave me a little
      signal, a tiny little signal with her eye, which meant: 'Do not recognize
      me!' and also seemed to say, 'Come back to see me again, my dear!'

 “The man was a gentleman, distingue, chic, an officer of the Legion
      of Honor, about fifty years old. He was supporting her as I had supported
      her myself when we were leaving the cemetery.

 “I went my way, filled with amazement, asking myself what this all
      meant, to what race of beings belonged this huntress of the tombs? Was she
      just a common girl, one who went to seek among the tombs for men who were
      in sorrow, haunted by the recollection of some woman, a wife or a
      sweetheart, and still troubled by the memory of vanished caresses? Was she
      unique? Are there many such? Is it a profession? Do they parade the
      cemetery as they parade the street? Or else was she only impressed with
      the admirable, profoundly philosophical idea of exploiting love
      recollections, which are revived in these funereal places?

 “And I would have liked to know whose widow she was on that special
      day.”