[

164 ] 

TOO FAR SOUTH.

 The

captain of the Boadicea

—regular London and
Australian trader—had long been the owner of a
crotchet, or perhaps it would be nearer the mark to
call it a theory. He was a comparatively young man,
and after a few trips of eighty-nine, ninety, and ninety-six
days respectively, he grew impatient; and at last,
seeing an opportunity of putting his idea to the test, he
determined to make the attempt.

 It was by no means a new theory; simply an expansion
of an old one. Years ago the masters of the Lightning

, Red Jacket

, and other clipper ships of renown, had
successfully demonstrated that, instead of turning round
the Cape of Good Hope as if it were a corner, in the old
style, vessels bound to the Australian colonies would, if
they kept on southward, be very likely to pick up a current
of strong westerly winds which, although twice the
distance might have to be sailed over, yet would take
them to their destination far more quickly than by the
usual route.

 But the master of the Boadicea

contended that none
of these early exponents of ‘Great Circular sailing’ had [

165 ]

as yet gone far enough south, and that, at a still more
distant point, a regular westerly wind-current, strong as
a good-sized gale and as steady as a trade, without its
fickleness, was to be met with which would shorten
the average passage by at least ten days.

 Older shipmasters laughed, and, saying that they
found the Roaring Forties quite strong enough for
them, stuck to the regular merchantman track, not so
old yet, they thought, nor so worn by the marks of their
keels, as to require a fresh one. However, Captain
Stewart had, by dint of long persuasion and perseverance,
obtained permission from his owners to test
practically his pet idea; and this was the reason that,
on the thirty-fifth day out, the Boadicea

, in place of
running her easting down amongst the Forties like a
Christian ship, with half a gale singing in the bellies of
her topsails, and mountains of dark-blue water roaring
rhythmically astern, found herself poking about close
hauled, with, on every hand as far as vision extended,
icebergs, varying in size and shape, from a respectable
many-peaked island to a spireless dissenting chapel.

 We were very far indeed to the southward.

    And now there came both mist and snow,

 And it grew wondrous cold;

 And ice, mast high, came floating by,

 

As green as emerald.







 Still our commander’s faith in his strong wind-streak was
unshaken; albeit, for a week or more, light baffling airs,
scarce sufficing to fill the stiffened canvas, had been our
portion. It was, too, indeed, ‘wondrous cold,’ and the [

166 ]

necessity for keeping a close and unwearied look-out
became every hour more apparent. Already we had had
narrow escapes of coming into collision with bergs
wandering aimlessly about, which, although wonderfully
beautiful objects in the daytime, and at a distance, with
the bright sunlight reflecting a thousand prismatic hues
from their glistening surfaces, yet of a dark night were
liable, with a touch almost, to send us in a twinkling to
Davy Jones.

 The crew growled and shivered, and shivered and
growled, making the while sarcastic inquiries as to the
near vicinity of the South Pole, wishing in undertones
that their skipper had been perched on the top of it
before leading them into such cold quarters. As for
myself, although rated as third mate, I was little more
than a lad at the time, and thought the whole thing
simply magnificent, hoping that we might penetrate still
further into the unknown ‘regions of thick-ribbed ice’
ahead of us, whilst visions of a Southern Continent,
bears, seals and walruses, floated through my imagination.
To be sure I was well clothed and comfortably
housed, which, perhaps, made all the difference. We are
very apt to look at things one-sidedly, and with regard
only to the character of our own particular surroundings.
Man born of a woman is a more or less selfish animal.
Every day the ‘wandering pearls of the sea,’ as someone
has called them, seemed to become more plentiful,
whilst, to add to our dilemma, a thick Antarctic fog,
through which the Boadicea

, with look-outs alow and
aloft, crept like some great blind monster feeling its [

167 ]

way across the ocean, arose and hid everything from
view.

 The only one on board with any experience of such
latitudes was our chief officer, a rough New Englander,
who had taken a couple of voyages to the Northern
fisheries in a Nantucket whaler. Far, however, from
giving himself airs on that account, he was probably the
most anxious man in the ship’s company. He had not
a particle of faith in the great theory; moreover, he had
seen a vessel ‘ripped’ in Davis Sound, which none of his
companions had.

 One evening, as if drawn up by some mighty hand,
the fog lifted, disclosing the sun, cold, red, and angry-looking,
glaring at us out of a sombre sky, and flushing
the water and the bergs round about with a flood
of purple light, on which our masts and rigging cast
tremulous, long, black shadows, crossing and recrossing
in a quivering maze, with big, shapeless blotches
here and there for the sails. Suddenly a deeper,
darker shadow fell athwart us; and there, not two
oars’ lengths away, between ship and sun, rose an
island.

 Men rubbed their eyes, and rubbed and looked again,
but there it was, every stern outline standing in bold
relief, a rough, ragged mass of barren, desolate rock, its
summit covered with snow—still, indisputably land.
Even as we gazed eagerly, wonderingly, the mirage faded away in a moment, as it had appeared, and the
mist descended like a grey, heavy curtain, enveloping all
things in its damp folds.

 [

168 ] 

Presently it came on to snow. The standing rigging
and running gear alike were coated with ice, whilst the
canvas took the consistency of sheet-iron, and rang
like glass when touched.

 Roaring fires were lit in oil drums, fore and aft, in
forecastle and cuddy. Soon the smoke in both places
was as thick as the fog on deck; a kind of damp,
unwholesome warmth was engendered as the impromptu
stoves grew red-hot; great half-frozen cockroaches, thinking
that the tropics were at hand, crawled out of nooks
and crannies; and it seemed at times a toss up whether
our end should come by ice or fire.

 Most of our crew were Danes or Swedes, hardy and
obedient men. If they had been British they would probably
have attempted to compel the captain to alter his
course. As it was, they simply put on all their available
clothing and growled quietly. No matter what their
nationality, all seamen growl; only some growl and work
also.

 Now, all the watches and clocks on board stopped, and,
refusing to start again, they were placed in the cook’s
oven with a view to warming the works. But, in the
excitement consequent upon fending off a huge berg,
which threatened to crush us, they were done brown, and
completely ruined. About this time the captain, thinking,
perhaps, that his experiment had gone far enough, gave
the order to square the yards. On going to the braces
we found that the sheaves of the blocks were frozen to
their pins and would not travel. Taking them to the
winch, with much heaving, the yards at last swung, [

169 ]

creaking and groaning, round, whilst showers of icy
fragments fell rattling on deck.

 It was almost a calm, the ship having barely steerage
way upon her; but the barometer was falling, and it was
judged prudent to shorten sail by putting the Boadicea

under a couple of lower top-sails and fore and mizzen
stay-sails.

 To stow each of the upper top-sails it took twenty-four
men and two boys—nearly, in fact, the ship’s company;
and, if the courses had not already been furled, I do not
think we could ever have managed them. The foot-ropes
were like glass, the reef-points as rigid as bar iron, and
one’s hands, after a minute aloft, had no more feeling in
them than the icy canvas they tried to grasp. Through
the fog, as we slowly descended the slippery ratlines, we
imagined we could see great bergs looming indistinctly;
and in our strained ears echoed the ever-impending
crash as the wind gradually freshened.

 It was a trying experience, even for the best prepared
amongst us, this comparatively sudden transit from the
tropics to twenty degrees below freezing point; and I
firmly believe that, but for the unlimited supply of hot
cocoa available day and night, at all hours, some of us
would have given in. Spirits could be had for the
asking, but no one seemed to care about them, even
those known to be inveterate topers declining rum with
something akin to disgust; perhaps the reason was that
it became quite thick, and, when taken into the mouth,
burned and excoriated both tongue and palate.

 The night of the day on which we had snugged the [

170 ]

Boadicea

down was dark as pitch, and you could feel the
fog as it hung low and clingingly to everything. Some
time in the middle watch the breeze died away, giving
place to light, unsteady airs—catspaws almost—and
occasional falls of snow.

 Imagine, if you can, the big ship creeping timorously
and uncertainly through the thick Polar darkness and
mist, a shapeless mass of yet thicker darkness, emitting
here and there ruddy flashes of light, reflected momentarily
back from snow-covered deck or coil of frozen rope.
No sound breaks the silence except a gentle lap-lapping of
water under her fore-foot as the canvas just fills enough
to draw. Now snow falls, not deliberately, but with a
soft, fleecy, rushing motion, which speedily fills up any
inequalities about the decks, and would fill them from
rail to rail if it lasted long. Presently a dozen bulky
spectres move noiselessly around the galley door, which,
being withdrawn, a warm glow streams out upon the
watch come for hot cocoa.

 Imagine, too, just as the tired men are about to drag
their half-frozen limbs below, a sudden deeper silence,
and a strange feeling of warmth and calm pervading the
ship; the sails giving one mighty creaking flap up there
in the gloom; the crash and rattle of ice falling from
their frozen folds, and a cluster of awe-struck, up-turned
faces, shining pallidly in the glow of the galley fire, as
the Boadicea

, but for a slight roll, lies idle and at
rest.

 Everyone knows and feels that something unusual has
taken place, but no man there can say what it is. A [

171 ]

muttered order is heard, and in a minute a flood of vivid
blue fire pours out into the darkness from the ship’s
quarter, and a great subdued ‘Ah!’ runs fore and aft
her, as, by its glare, we see tall, jagged cliffs, weird and
ghastly in the strange light, towering far on high above
our mast-heads, which appear to touch them.

 ‘Get the deep-sea lead overboard!’ shouts the
captain.

 ‘Watch, there, watch!’ needlessly cry the men, as the
line slips from their hands; and no bottom at one
hundred fathoms.

 ‘’Taint land at all,’ says the mate quietly. ‘I kin
smell ice; an’ ef we don’t mind we may calculate to
winter ’mongst it ’stead o’ makin’ tracks for the Antipodes.
Lower the quarter-boat,’ he goes on, ‘an’ tie the
ship up for the night, as, ef I ain’t mistook, we’re pooty
nigh surrounded.’

 More bluelights are burned, and by their help and
those of lanterns, the Boadicea

, in a somewhat unnatural
plight, is warped alongside a kind of ice jetty which
stretches out from the main mass, and which, as if to
save us the trouble of carrying out anchors, also to
complete the resemblance to a pier, is furnished here and
there with great knobs, to which we make fast our
lines.

 If you will try and picture to yourself the scene
I have described, you will, I think, be willing to admit
that ship seldom entered stranger harbour in a stranger
manner, or that the ‘sweet little cherub, sitting up
aloft,’ who is supposed to keep a special look-out for [

172 ]

‘ TN: opening quote invisible poor Jack,’ and who on the present occasion—all the
more honour to him—must have felt colder even than
the proverbial upper hank of a Greenlandman’s gib TN: OED gives this as an old spelling of "jib" ,
seldom performed his duty better.

 Perhaps the all-pervading stillness was the thing that
struck us most. The fenders, even, between the ship’s
side and her novel pier scarcely gave a creak. And
yet we were conscious that, somewhere, not very far
away, it was beginning to blow freshly, although the
sound fell on our ears but as a subdued, faint murmur,
serving only to intensify the surrounding silence and
hush.

 ‘There’s a fire up there!’ exclaimed one of the men,
presently. And, sure enough, a tiny, sickly flame appeared
far away above us. It grew gradually larger and
larger, till at length a long, broad streak of silver shot
down the ice-mountains and fell athwart our decks, as
a three-quarters-full moon, pale, washed-out and sickly-looking,
shone for a minute through the low, black
clouds hurrying swiftly across her face.

 A dull, grey dawn, at last, giving us just enough light
to see what had happened. Ice everywhere!

    The ice was here, the ice was there,

 The ice was all around;







 and on every side rose huge bergs from one hundred feet
to two hundred feet in height, and enclosing a space of
barely a mile in circumference; an ice-bound lake, in
fact; and, what struck a chill of terror to our hearts as we
gazed, a lake without any exit. Look as we might, there [

173 ]

was not the least sign of an opening. Unwittingly we had
sailed or drifted into a girdle of conjoined bergs. During
the night the passage through which we entered had
closed, and a cruel and stupendous barrier, hard as
granite, slippery as glass, lay betwixt us and the outer
ocean.

 Within, the water was as smooth as a mill-pond, the
air was quite warm, and after breakfast all hands went
‘ashore’ to stretch their legs, look wonderingly up at our
prison walls, and speculate on the chances of getting out.

 As I gazed around me at the strange scene—the snow-clad,
towering peaks, glittering coldly in the yet feeble
sun rays, the deep, shadow-laden valleys at their bases,
and the perpendicular curtains of naked, steely-blue ice
connecting one berg with the other—there came to my
mind some long-forgotten lines of Montgomery’s, in
which he depicts the awful fate of an ice-bound vessel:—

    There lies a vessel in that realm of frost,

 Not wrecked, not stranded, but for ever lost;

 Its keel embedded in the solid mass;

 Its glistening sails appear expanded glass;

 The transverse ropes with pearls enormous strung.

 .        .        .        .        .        .        .

 Morn shall return, and noon, and eve, and night

 Meet here with interchanging shade and light;

 But from that barque no timber shall decay;

 Of these cold forms no feature pass away.







 I had rather enjoyed the first days of our Antarctic
experiences, but the pleasure began decidedly to pall
with such a horrible contingency in view, and I was now [

174 ]

fully as anxious as anyone for clear water and a straight
course.

 After a while, the gig was manned, and, with the
captain and chief mate, we pulled round our harbour to
a spot where, from the ship, a part of the ice-curtain
seemed low and pretty accessible. So it had appeared;
but when we reached it we found fifty feet of perpendicular
slippery wall between our boat’s gunwale and the
summit of the ridge we had hoped to mount.

 ‘We’re in a pooty nice kind o’ a fix,’ said our mate, as
we returned. ‘An’,’ glancing at the lowering sky, ‘I
reckon it’s going to blow some, presently. Mebbe it’ll
blow us out o’ these chunks of ice.’

 The captain made no reply, but he was evidently not
in a very cheerful state of mind.

 That evening it did begin to blow very hard. Not
that we felt it much, but we could hear the storm
howling and roaring outside, and the thunderous
breakers which dashed themselves against our sheltering
bergs, causing them to tremble and pitch now
and again as the mighty seas struck their bases.
We had shifted the Boadicea

out to the extreme end
of the jetty, double-banked our fenders, and taken
every other precaution we could think of, in addition
to standing-by through the night to cast off and sheet
home at a minute’s notice.

 There was no more silence now; for, although we
were all drifting away together about E. half S. before
the wind, the bergs forming our enclosure ground
against each other with an incessant rending, tearing [

175 ]

sound, which now, although seeming to foretell an
early dissolution of partnership, filled us with terror
lest some of them should topple over on the ship.

 The ship herself, no longer steady, was hove
violently up and down with every motion of the
bergs; whilst the great wooden fenders, cut from
spare spars, were torn to splinters, and the hawsers
surged round their icy mooring posts with a curious,
screaming, intermittent noise, making us think that
every moment they were about to part.

 Four bells in the morning watch had just struck
when we heard a terrific crash rising high above the
surrounding din, and the next instant a great wave
came rushing over the Boadicea

, filling her decks,
nearly lifting her on to the ice, and then slamming
her down with such force as to snap the hawsers
like threads and smash the bulwarks to matchwood
the whole length of the port side. Drifting away
from our friendly jetty, we at once felt that our
prison was broken up; for, now, the gale from which
we had been so long sheltered howled and tore
through the rigging, whilst cataracts of bitter cold
water rushed in quick succession over the decks,
and lumps of ice bumped up against the Boadicea’s

bows and sides.

 ‘Set the lower fore-top-sail and mizzen-stay-sail!’

 And now the slatting and banging of canvas, the
rattle of iron sheets and hanks, the hoarse cries of
the men as they staggered about the wet, slippery
planking, together with the rending and smashing of [

176 ]

ice all around, made up a scene that defies description;
whilst to lend it an additional weirdness, a ‘flare-up’
of oakum and tar, which had been run up to a
lower-stuns’l boom-end, blazed wildly overhead like
a great fierce eye looking down upon us out of the
thick darkness. So closely were we beset, however,
that, spite of the canvas, we soon found that we
were simply drifting aimlessly about amidst immense
fragments of capsized bergs, which threatened every
moment to crush us. Indeed, we did get one squeeze
that made the ship crack again, and whose after
effect was seen by the fact that the cabin doors
for the rest of the passage refused to close by a
good six inches. Presently, grinding and scraping
up alongside a small berg—or portion of a larger
one, we cannot tell which—we make fast to it as
well as we are able, and direct all our efforts to
fending off its companions. As daylight approaches,
we notice that the ice becomes rarer, and sails by
at longer intervals; and as it breaks more fully out
of a lowering yellowish sky a wild sight meets our
eyes.

 The sea is dotted with bergs—small ones nodding
and bobbing along, big ones gliding majestically before
the wind, till, a pair of these latter colliding, down
crumble spires and minarets, towers and pinnacles,
suddenly as a child’s card-built house, sending up
tall columns of water as they fall.

 It is not this spectacle, however, that brings forth
a simultaneous shout from everyone on board, but [

177 ]

the appearance, as one berg gives a half-turn, of an
object, hardly two hundred yards from our jibboom end,
standing there, amidst all the wild commotion, steadfast,
rugged and grim, with tall breakers curling up
against its ice-surrounded, dark red cliffs, and falling
back in showers of foam, showing milky-white in the
morning gloom.

 It is land, surely! And, surely, we have seen those
forbidding, snow-capped precipices before. It is the
island of the mirage , substantial enough this time,
and in another ten minutes we shall be dashed to
atoms against its surf-encircled base.

 The sight had a wondrous effect, and men who
seemed incapable a minute before of stirring their
stiffened limbs now hopped up the rigging like goats,
and scampered along the deck with the top-sail halliards
as if racing for a wager, in obedience to the order
to cast off and make sail.

 ‘Hard a port!’ and the Boadicea’s

poop is splashed
with spray from rocks and ice as she turns slowly
from a jagged, honeycombed promontory, whilst her
late consort goes headlong to destruction on its iron
teeth.

 It is still blowing hard; but our captain is more
than satisfied; and, under everything she can carry,
the Boadicea

rushes, like a frightened stag, fast away,
northwards and eastwards, out of those dismal seas of ice
and fog, snow, and unknown islands, a very nightmare
of navigation, into which one merchant skipper, at
least, will never willingly venture again.

 [

178 ] 

However, we, after all, perhaps, set our course on
a higher parallel than anyone had done since Ross
in ’41, followed the outline of a southern continent,
whose volcanoes flamed to heaven from a lifeless,
desolate land of ice and snow. And, as some compensation
for our trouble and dangers, till we sighted
the south end of Tasmania, we never had occasion
to touch a rope, so steadily and strongly blew the
fair wind.

 ‘Seventy-five days—a rattlin’ good passage!’ exclaimed
our Port Jackson pilot; and when he asked what
had become of our bulwarks, and why the cuddy
doors wouldn’t shut, we simply told him we had
been ‘Too far south.’