TWO LITTLE SOLDIERS
    

      Every Sunday, as soon as they were free, the little soldiers would go for
      a walk. They turned to the right on leaving the barracks, crossed
      Courbevoie with rapid strides, as though on a forced march; then, as the
      houses grew scarcer, they slowed down and followed the dusty road which
      leads to Bezons.
    

      They were small and thin, lost in their ill-fitting capes, too large and
      too long, whose sleeves covered their hands; their ample red trousers fell
      in folds around their ankles. Under the high, stiff shako one could just
      barely perceive two thin, hollow-cheeked Breton faces, with their calm,
      naive blue eyes. They never spoke during their journey, going straight
      before them, the same idea in each one's mind taking the place of
      conversation. For at the entrance of the little forest of Champioux they
      had found a spot which reminded them of home, and they did not feel happy
      anywhere else.
    

      At the crossing of the Colombes and Chatou roads, when they arrived under
      the trees, they would take off their heavy, oppressive headgear and wipe
      their foreheads.
    

      They always stopped for a while on the bridge at Bezons, and looked at the
      Seine. They stood there several minutes, bending over the railing,
      watching the white sails, which perhaps reminded them of their home, and
      of the fishing smacks leaving for the open.
    

      As soon as they had crossed the Seine, they would purchase provisions at
      the delicatessen, the baker's, and the wine merchant's. A piece of
      bologna, four cents' worth of bread, and a quart of wine, made up the
      luncheon which they carried away, wrapped up in their handkerchiefs. But
      as soon as they were out of the village their gait would slacken and they
      would begin to talk.
    

      Before them was a plain with a few clumps of trees, which led to the
      woods, a little forest which seemed to remind them of that other forest at
      Kermarivan. The wheat and oat fields bordered on the narrow path, and Jean
      Kerderen said each time to Luc Le Ganidec:
    

      “It's just like home, just like Plounivon.”
    

      “Yes, it's just like home.”
    

      And they went on, side by side, their minds full of dim memories of home.
      They saw the fields, the hedges, the forests, and beaches.
    

      Each time they stopped near a large stone on the edge of the private
      estate, because it reminded them of the dolmen of Locneuven.
    

      As soon as they reached the first clump of trees, Luc Le Ganidec would cut
      off a small stick, and, whittling it slowly, would walk on, thinking of
      the folks at home.
    

      Jean Kerderen carried the provisions.
    

      From time to time Luc would mention a name, or allude to some boyish prank
      which would give them food for plenty of thought. And the home country, so
      dear and so distant, would little by little gain possession of their
      minds, sending them back through space, to the well-known forms and
      noises, to the familiar scenery, with the fragrance of its green fields
      and sea air. They no longer noticed the smells of the city. And in their
      dreams they saw their friends leaving, perhaps forever, for the dangerous
      fishing grounds.
    

      They were walking slowly, Luc Le Ganidec and Jean Kerderen, contented and
      sad, haunted by a sweet sorrow, the slow and penetrating sorrow of a
      captive animal which remembers the days of its freedom.
    

      And when Luc had finished whittling his stick, they came to a little nook,
      where every Sunday they took their meal. They found the two bricks, which
      they had hidden in a hedge, and they made a little fire of dry branches
      and roasted their sausages on the ends of their knives.
    

      When their last crumb of bread had been eaten and the last drop of wine
      had been drunk, they stretched themselves out on the grass side by side,
      without speaking, their half-closed eyes looking away in the distance,
      their hands clasped as in prayer, their red-trousered legs mingling with
      the bright colors of the wild flowers.
    

      Towards noon they glanced, from time to time, towards the village of
      Bezons, for the dairy maid would soon be coming. Every Sunday she would
      pass in front of them on the way to milk her cow, the only cow in the
      neighborhood which was sent out to pasture.
    

      Soon they would see the girl, coming through the fields, and it pleased
      them to watch the sparkling sunbeams reflected from her shining pail. They
      never spoke of her. They were just glad to see her, without understanding
      why.
    

      She was a tall, strapping girl, freckled and tanned by the open air—a
      girl typical of the Parisian suburbs.
    

      Once, on noticing that they were always sitting in the same place, she
      said to them:
    

      “Do you always come here?”
    

      Luc Le Ganidec, more daring than his friend, stammered:
    

      “Yes, we come here for our rest.”
    

      That was all. But the following Sunday, on seeing them, she smiled with
      the kindly smile of a woman who understood their shyness, and she asked:
    

      “What are you doing here? Are you watching the grass grow?”
    

      Luc, cheered up, smiled: “P'raps.”
    

      She continued: “It's not growing fast, is it?”
    

      He answered, still laughing: “Not exactly.”
    

      She went on. But when she came back with her pail full of milk, she
      stopped before them and said:
    

      “Want some? It will remind you of home.”
    

      She had, perhaps instinctively, guessed and touched the right spot.
    

      Both were moved. Then not without difficulty, she poured some milk into
      the bottle in which they had brought their wine. Luc started to drink,
      carefully watching lest he should take more than his share. Then he passed
      the bottle to Jean. She stood before them, her hands on her hips, her pail
      at her feet, enjoying the pleasure that she was giving them. Then she went
      on, saying: “Well, bye-bye until next Sunday!”
    

      For a long time they watched her tall form as it receded in the distance,
      blending with the background, and finally disappeared.
    

      The following week as they left the barracks, Jean said to Luc:
    

      “Don't you think we ought to buy her something good?”
    

      They were sorely perplexed by the problem of choosing something to bring
      to the dairy maid. Luc was in favor of bringing her some chitterlings; but
      Jean, who had a sweet tooth, thought that candy would be the best thing.
      He won, and so they went to a grocery to buy two sous' worth, of red and
      white candies.
    

      This time they ate more quickly than usual, excited by anticipation.
    

      Jean was the first one to notice her. “There she is,” he said;
      and Luc answered: “Yes, there she is.”
    

      She smiled when she saw them, and cried:
    

      “Well, how are you to-day?”
    

      They both answered together:
    

      “All right! How's everything with you?”
    

      Then she started to talk of simple things which might interest them; of
      the weather, of the crops, of her masters.
    

      They didn't dare to offer their candies, which were slowly melting in
      Jean's pocket. Finally Luc, growing bolder, murmured:
    

      “We have brought you something.”
    

      She asked: “Let's see it.”
    

      Then Jean, blushing to the tips of his ears, reached in his pocket, and
      drawing out the little paper bag, handed it to her.
    

      She began to eat the little sweet dainties. The two soldiers sat in front
      of her, moved and delighted.
    

      At last she went to do her milking, and when she came back she again gave
      them some milk.
    

      They thought of her all through the week and often spoke of her: The
      following Sunday she sat beside them for a longer time.
    

      The three of them sat there, side by side, their eyes looking far away in
      the distance, their hands clasped over their knees, and they told each
      other little incidents and little details of the villages where they were
      born, while the cow, waiting to be milked, stretched her heavy head toward
      the girl and mooed.
    

      Soon the girl consented to eat with them and to take a sip of wine. Often
      she brought them plums pocket for plums were now ripe. Her presence
      enlivened the little Breton soldiers, who chattered away like two birds.
    

      One Tuesday something unusual happened to Luc Le Ganidec; he asked for
      leave and did not return until ten o'clock at night.
    

      Jean, worried and racked his brain to account for his friend's having
      obtained leave.
    

      The following Friday, Luc borrowed ten sons from one of his friends, and
      once more asked and obtained leave for several hours.
    

      When he started out with Jean on Sunday he seemed queer, disturbed,
      changed. Kerderen did not understand; he vaguely suspected something, but
      he could not guess what it might be.
    

      They went straight to the usual place, and lunched slowly. Neither was
      hungry.
    

      Soon the girl appeared. They watched her approach as they always did. When
      she was near, Luc arose and went towards her. She placed her pail on the
      ground and kissed him. She kissed him passionately, throwing her arms
      around his neck, without paying attention to Jean, without even noticing
      that he was there.
    

      Poor Jean was dazed, so dazed that he could not understand. His mind was
      upset and his heart broken, without his even realizing why.
    

      Then the girl sat down beside Luc, and they started to chat.
    

      Jean was not looking at them. He understood now why his friend had gone
      out twice during the week. He felt the pain and the sting which treachery
      and deceit leave in their wake.
    

      Luc and the girl went together to attend to the cow.
    

      Jean followed them with his eyes. He saw them disappear side by side, the
      red trousers of his friend making a scarlet spot against the white road.
      It was Luc who sank the stake to which the cow was tethered. The girl
      stooped down to milk the cow, while he absent-mindedly stroked the
      animal's glossy neck. Then they left the pail in the grass and disappeared
      in the woods.
    

      Jean could no longer see anything but the wall of leaves through which
      they had passed. He was unmanned so that he did not have strength to
      stand. He stayed there, motionless, bewildered and grieving-simple,
      passionate grief. He wanted to weep, to run away, to hide somewhere, never
      to see anyone again.
    

      Then he saw them coming back again. They were walking slowly, hand in
      hand, as village lovers do. Luc was carrying the pail.
    

      After kissing him again, the girl went on, nodding carelessly to Jean. She
      did not offer him any milk that day.
    

      The two little soldiers sat side by side, motionless as always, silent and
      quiet, their calm faces in no way betraying the trouble in their hearts.
      The sun shone down on them. From time to time they could hear the
      plaintive lowing of the cow. At the usual time they arose to return.
    

      Luc was whittling a stick. Jean carried the empty bottle. He left it at
      the wine merchant's in Bezons. Then they stopped on the bridge, as they
      did every Sunday, and watched the water flowing by.
    

      Jean leaned over the railing, farther and farther, as though he had seen
      something in the stream which hypnotized him. Luc said to him:
    

      “What's the matter? Do you want a drink?”
    

      He had hardly said the last word when Jean's head carried away the rest of
      his body, and the little blue and red soldier fell like a shot and
      disappeared in the water.
    

      Luc, paralyzed with horror, tried vainly to shout for help. In the
      distance he saw something move; then his friend's head bobbed up out of
      the water only to disappear again.
    

      Farther down he again noticed a hand, just one hand, which appeared and
      again went out of sight. That was all.
    

      The boatmen who had rushed to the scene found the body that day.
    

      Luc ran back to the barracks, crazed, and with eyes and voice full of
      tears, he related the accident: “He leaned—he—he was
      leaning —so far over—that his head carried him away—and—he—fell
      —he fell——”
    

      Emotion choked him so that he could say no more. If he had only known.