TYPHUS
    

A YOUNG lieutenant
      called Klimov was travelling from Petersburg to Moscow in a smoking
      carriage of the mail train. Opposite him was sitting an elderly man with a
      shaven face like a sea captain’s, by all appearances a well-to-do
      Finn or Swede. He pulled at his pipe the whole journey and kept talking
      about the same subject:
    

      “Ha, you are an officer! I have a brother an officer too, only he is
      a naval officer. . . . He is a naval officer, and he is stationed at
      Kronstadt. Why are you going to Moscow?”
    

      “I am serving there.”
    

      “Ha! And are you a family man?”
    

      “No, I live with my sister and aunt.”
    

      “My brother’s an officer, only he is a naval officer; he has a
      wife and three children. Ha!”
    

      The Finn seemed continually surprised at something, and gave a broad
      idiotic grin when he exclaimed “Ha!” and continually puffed at
      his stinking pipe. Klimov, who for some reason did not feel well, and
      found it burdensome to answer questions, hated him with all his heart. He
      dreamed of how nice it would be to snatch the wheezing pipe out of his
      hand and fling it under the seat, and drive the Finn himself into another
      compartment.
    

      “Detestable people these Finns and . . . Greeks,” he thought.
      “Absolutely superfluous, useless, detestable people. They simply
      fill up space on the earthly globe. What are they for?”
    

      And the thought of Finns and Greeks produced a feeling akin to sickness
      all over his body. For the sake of comparison he tried to think of the
      French, of the Italians, but his efforts to think of these people evoked
      in his mind, for some reason, nothing but images of organ-grinders, naked
      women, and the foreign oleographs which hung over the chest of drawers at
      home, at his aunt’s.
    

      Altogether the officer felt in an abnormal state. He could not arrange his
      arms and legs comfortably on the seat, though he had the whole seat to
      himself. His mouth felt dry and sticky; there was a heavy fog in his
      brain; his thoughts seemed to be straying, not only within his head, but
      outside his skull, among the seats and the people that were shrouded in
      the darkness of night. Through the mist in his brain, as through a dream,
      he heard the murmur of voices, the rumble of wheels, the slamming of
      doors. The sounds of the bells, the whistles, the guards, the running to
      and fro of passengers on the platforms, seemed more frequent than usual.
      The time flew by rapidly, imperceptibly, and so it seemed as though the
      train were stopping at stations every minute, and metallic voices crying
      continually:
    

      “Is the mail ready?”
    

      “Yes!” was repeatedly coming from outside.
    

      It seemed as though the man in charge of the heating came in too often to
      look at the thermometer, that the noise of trains going in the opposite
      direction and the rumble of the wheels over the bridges was incessant. The
      noise, the whistles, the Finn, the tobacco smoke—all this mingling
      with the menace and flickering of the misty images in his brain, the shape
      and character of which a man in health can never recall, weighed upon
      Klimov like an unbearable nightmare. In horrible misery he lifted his
      heavy head, looked at the lamp in the rays of which shadows and misty
      blurs seemed to be dancing. He wanted to ask for water, but his parched
      tongue would hardly move, and he scarcely had strength to answer the Finn’s
      questions. He tried to lie down more comfortably and go to sleep, but he
      could not succeed. The Finn several times fell asleep, woke up again,
      lighted his pipe, addressed him with his “Ha!” and went to
      sleep again; and still the lieutenant’s legs could not get into a
      comfortable position, and still the menacing images stood facing him.
    

      At Spirovo he went out into the station for a drink of water. He saw
      people sitting at the table and hurriedly eating.
    

      “And how can they eat!” he thought, trying not to sniff the
      air, that smelt of roast meat, and not to look at the munching mouths
      —they both seemed to him sickeningly disgusting.
    

      A good-looking lady was conversing loudly with a military man in a red
      cap, and showing magnificent white teeth as she smiled; and the smile, and
      the teeth, and the lady herself made on Klimov the same revolting
      impression as the ham and the rissoles. He could not understand how it was
      the military man in the red cap was not ill at ease, sitting beside her
      and looking at her healthy, smiling face.
    

      When after drinking some water he went back to his carriage, the Finn was
      sitting smoking; his pipe was wheezing and squelching like a golosh with
      holes in it in wet weather.
    

      “Ha!” he said, surprised; “what station is this?”
    

      “I don’t know,” answered Klimov, lying down and shutting
      his mouth that he might not breathe the acrid tobacco smoke.
    

      “And when shall we reach Tver?”
    

      “I don’t know. Excuse me, I . . . I can’t answer. I am
      ill. I caught cold today.”
    

      The Finn knocked his pipe against the window-frame and began talking of
      his brother, the naval officer. Klimov no longer heard him; he was
      thinking miserably of his soft, comfortable bed, of a bottle of cold
      water, of his sister Katya, who was so good at making one comfortable,
      soothing, giving one water. He even smiled when the vision of his orderly
      Pavel, taking off his heavy stifling boots and putting water on the little
      table, flitted through his imagination. He fancied that if he could only
      get into his bed, have a drink of water, his nightmare would give place to
      sound healthy sleep.
    

      “Is the mail ready?” a hollow voice reached him from the
      distance.
    

      “Yes,” answered a bass voice almost at the window.
    

      It was already the second or third station from Spirovo.
    

      The time was flying rapidly in leaps and bounds, and it seemed as though
      the bells, whistles, and stoppings would never end. In despair Klimov
      buried his face in the corner of the seat, clutched his head in his hands,
      and began again thinking of his sister Katya and his orderly Pavel, but
      his sister and his orderly were mixed up with the misty images in his
      brain, whirled round, and disappeared. His burning breath, reflected from
      the back of the seat, seemed to scald his face; his legs were
      uncomfortable; there was a draught from the window on his back; but,
      however wretched he was, he did not want to change his position. . . . A
      heavy nightmarish lethargy gradually gained possession of him and fettered
      his limbs.
    

      When he brought himself to raise his head, it was already light in the
      carriage. The passengers were putting on their fur coats and moving about.
      The train was stopping. Porters in white aprons and with discs on their
      breasts were bustling among the passengers and snatching up their boxes.
      Klimov put on his great-coat, mechanically followed the other passengers
      out of the carriage, and it seemed to him that not he, but some one else
      was moving, and he felt that his fever, his thirst, and the menacing
      images which had not let him sleep all night, came out of the carriage
      with him. Mechanically he took his luggage and engaged a sledge-driver.
      The man asked him for a rouble and a quarter to drive to Povarsky Street,
      but he did not haggle, and without protest got submissively into the
      sledge. He still understood the difference of numbers, but money had
      ceased to have any value to him.
    

      At home Klimov was met by his aunt and his sister Katya, a girl of
      eighteen. When Katya greeted him she had a pencil and exercise book in her
      hand, and he remembered that she was preparing for an examination as a
      teacher. Gasping with fever, he walked aimlessly through all the rooms
      without answering their questions or greetings, and when he reached his
      bed he sank down on the pillow. The Finn, the red cap, the lady with the
      white teeth, the smell of roast meat, the flickering blurs, filled his
      consciousness, and by now he did not know where he was and did not hear
      the agitated voices.
    

      When he recovered consciousness he found himself in bed, undressed, saw a
      bottle of water and Pavel, but it was no cooler, nor softer, nor more
      comfortable for that. His arms and legs, as before, refused to lie
      comfortably; his tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth, and he heard the
      wheezing of the Finn’s pipe. . . . A stalwart, black-bearded doctor
      was busy doing something beside the bed, brushing against Pavel with his
      broad back.
    

      “It’s all right, it’s all right, young man,” he
      muttered. “Excellent, excellent . . . goo-od, goo-od . . . !”
    

      The doctor called Klimov “young man,” said “goo-od”
      instead of “good” and “so-o” instead of “so.”
    

      “So-o . . . so-o . . . so-o,” he murmured. “Goo-od,
      goo-od . . . ! Excellent, young man. You mustn’t lose heart!”
    

      The doctor’s rapid, careless talk, his well-fed countenance, and
      condescending “young man,” irritated Klimov.
    

      “Why do you call me ‘young man’?” he moaned.
      “What familiarity! Damn it all!”
    

      And he was frightened by his own voice. The voice was so dried up, so weak
      and peevish, that he would not have known it.
    

      “Excellent, excellent!” muttered the doctor, not in the least
      offended. . . . “You mustn’t get angry, so-o, so-o, so-s. . .
      .”
    

      And the time flew by at home with the same startling swiftness as in the
      railway carriage. The daylight was continually being replaced by the dusk
      of evening. The doctor seemed never to leave his bedside, and he heard at
      every moment his “so-o, so-o, so-o.” A continual succession of
      people was incessantly crossing the bedroom. Among them were: Pavel, the
      Finn, Captain Yaroshevitch, Lance-Corporal Maximenko, the red cap, the
      lady with the white teeth, the doctor. They were all talking and waving
      their arms, smoking and eating. Once by daylight Klimov saw the chaplain
      of the regiment, Father Alexandr, who was standing before the bed, wearing
      a stole and with a prayer-book in his hand. He was muttering something
      with a grave face such as Klimov had never seen in him before. The
      lieutenant remembered that Father Alexandr used in a friendly way to call
      all the Catholic officers “Poles,” and wanting to amuse him,
      he cried:
    

      “Father, Yaroshevitch the Pole has climbed up a pole!”
    

      But Father Alexandr, a light-hearted man who loved a joke, did not smile,
      but became graver than ever, and made the sign of the cross over Klimov.
      At night-time by turn two shadows came noiselessly in and out; they were
      his aunt and sister. His sister’s shadow knelt down and prayed; she
      bowed down to the ikon, and her grey shadow on the wall bowed down too, so
      that two shadows were praying. The whole time there was a smell of roast
      meat and the Finn’s pipe, but once Klimov smelt the strong smell of
      incense. He felt so sick he could not lie still, and began shouting:
    

      “The incense! Take away the incense!”
    

      There was no answer. He could only hear the subdued singing of the priest
      somewhere and some one running upstairs.
    

      When Klimov came to himself there was not a soul in his bedroom. The
      morning sun was streaming in at the window through the lower blind, and a
      quivering sunbeam, bright and keen as the sword’s edge, was flashing
      on the glass bottle. He heard the rattle of wheels— so there was no
      snow now in the street. The lieutenant looked at the ray, at the familiar
      furniture, at the door, and the first thing he did was to laugh. His chest
      and stomach heaved with delicious, happy, tickling laughter. His whole
      body from head to foot was overcome by a sensation of infinite happiness
      and joy in life, such as the first man must have felt when he was created
      and first saw the world. Klimov felt a passionate desire for movement,
      people, talk. His body lay a motionless block; only his hands stirred, but
      that he hardly noticed, and his whole attention was concentrated on
      trifles. He rejoiced in his breathing, in his laughter, rejoiced in the
      existence of the water-bottle, the ceiling, the sunshine, the tape on the
      curtains. God’s world, even in the narrow space of his bedroom,
      seemed beautiful, varied, grand. When the doctor made his appearance, the
      lieutenant was thinking what a delicious thing medicine was, how charming
      and pleasant the doctor was, and how nice and interesting people were in
      general.
    

      “So-o, so, so. . . Excellent, excellent! . . . Now we are well
      again. . . . Goo-od, goo-od!” the doctor pattered.
    

      The lieutenant listened and laughed joyously; he remembered the Finn, the
      lady with the white teeth, the train, and he longed to smoke, to eat.
    

      “Doctor,” he said, “tell them to give me a crust of rye
      bread and salt, and . . . and sardines.”
    

      The doctor refused; Pavel did not obey the order, and did not go for the
      bread. The lieutenant could not bear this and began crying like a naughty
      child.
    

      “Baby!” laughed the doctor. “Mammy, bye-bye!”
    

      Klimov laughed, too, and when the doctor went away he fell into a sound
      sleep. He woke up with the same joyfulness and sensation of happiness. His
      aunt was sitting near the bed.
    

      “Well, aunt,” he said joyfully. “What has been the
      matter?”
    

      “Spotted typhus.”
    

      “Really. But now I am well, quite well! Where is Katya?”
    

      “She is not at home. I suppose she has gone somewhere from her
      examination.”
    

      The old lady said this and looked at her stocking; her lips began
      quivering, she turned away, and suddenly broke into sobs. Forgetting the
      doctor’s prohibition in her despair, she said:
    

      “Ah, Katya, Katya! Our angel is gone! Is gone!”
    

      She dropped her stocking and bent down to it, and as she did so her cap
      fell off her head. Looking at her grey head and understanding nothing,
      Klimov was frightened for Katya, and asked:
    

      “Where is she, aunt?”
    

      The old woman, who had forgotten Klimov and was thinking only of her
      sorrow, said:
    

      “She caught typhus from you, and is dead. She was buried the day
      before yesterday.”
    

      This terrible, unexpected news was fully grasped by Klimov’s
      consciousness; but terrible and startling as it was, it could not overcome
      the animal joy that filled the convalescent. He cried and laughed, and
      soon began scolding because they would not let him eat.
    

      Only a week later when, leaning on Pavel, he went in his dressing-gown to
      the window, looked at the overcast spring sky and listened to the
      unpleasant clang of the old iron rails which were being carted by, his
      heart ached, he burst into tears, and leaned his forehead against the
      window-frame.
    

      “How miserable I am!” he muttered. “My God, how
      miserable!”
    

      And joy gave way to the boredom of everyday life and the feeling of his
      irrevocable loss.
    











      A MISFORTUNE
    

SOFYA PETROVNA, the
      wife of Lubyantsev the notary, a handsome young woman of five-and-twenty,
      was walking slowly along a track that had been cleared in the wood, with
      Ilyin, a lawyer who was spending the summer in the neighbourhood. It was
      five o’clock in the evening. Feathery-white masses of cloud stood
      overhead; patches of bright blue sky peeped out between them. The clouds
      stood motionless, as though they had caught in the tops of the tall old
      pine-trees. It was still and sultry.
    

      Farther on, the track was crossed by a low railway embankment on which a
      sentinel with a gun was for some reason pacing up and down. Just beyond
      the embankment there was a large white church with six domes and a rusty
      roof.
    

      “I did not expect to meet you here,” said Sofya Petrovna,
      looking at the ground and prodding at the last year’s leaves with
      the tip of her parasol, “and now I am glad we have met. I want to
      speak to you seriously and once for all. I beg you, Ivan Mihalovitch, if
      you really love and respect me, please make an end of this pursuit of me!
      You follow me about like a shadow, you are continually looking at me not
      in a nice way, making love to me, writing me strange letters, and . . .
      and I don’t know where it’s all going to end! Why, what can
      come of it?”
    

      Ilyin said nothing. Sofya Petrovna walked on a few steps and continued:
    

      “And this complete transformation in you all came about in the
      course of two or three weeks, after five years’ friendship. I don’t
      know you, Ivan Mihalovitch!”
    

      Sofya Petrovna stole a glance at her companion. Screwing up his eyes, he
      was looking intently at the fluffy clouds. His face looked angry,
      ill-humoured, and preoccupied, like that of a man in pain forced to listen
      to nonsense.
    

      “I wonder you don’t see it yourself,” Madame Lubyantsev
      went on, shrugging her shoulders. “You ought to realize that it’s
      not a very nice part you are playing. I am married; I love and respect my
      husband. . . . I have a daughter . . . . Can you think all that means
      nothing? Besides, as an old friend you know my attitude to family life and
      my views as to the sanctity of marriage.”
    

      Ilyin cleared his throat angrily and heaved a sigh.
    

      “Sanctity of marriage . . .” he muttered. “Oh, Lord!”
    

      “Yes, yes. . . . I love my husband, I respect him; and in any case I
      value the peace of my home. I would rather let myself be killed than be a
      cause of unhappiness to Andrey and his daughter. . . . And I beg you, Ivan
      Mihalovitch, for God’s sake, leave me in peace! Let us be as good,
      true friends as we used to be, and give up these sighs and groans, which
      really don’t suit you. It’s settled and over! Not a word more
      about it. Let us talk of something else.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna again stole a glance at Ilyin’s face. Ilyin was
      looking up; he was pale, and was angrily biting his quivering lips. She
      could not understand why he was angry and why he was indignant, but his
      pallor touched her.
    

      “Don’t be angry; let us be friends,” she said
      affectionately. “Agreed? Here’s my hand.”
    

      Ilyin took her plump little hand in both of his, squeezed it, and slowly
      raised it to his lips.
    

      “I am not a schoolboy,” he muttered. “I am not in the
      least tempted by friendship with the woman I love.”
    

      “Enough, enough! It’s settled and done with. We have reached
      the seat; let us sit down.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna’s soul was filled with a sweet sense of relief: the
      most difficult and delicate thing had been said, the painful question was
      settled and done with. Now she could breathe freely and look Ilyin
      straight in the face. She looked at him, and the egoistic feeling of the
      superiority of the woman over the man who loves her, agreeably flattered
      her. It pleased her to see this huge, strong man, with his manly, angry
      face and his big black beard—clever, cultivated, and, people said,
      talented—sit down obediently beside her and bow his head dejectedly.
      For two or three minutes they sat without speaking.
    

      “Nothing is settled or done with,” began Ilyin. “You
      repeat copy-book maxims to me. ‘I love and respect my husband . . .
      the sanctity of marriage. . . .’ I know all that without your help,
      and I could tell you more, too. I tell you truthfully and honestly that I
      consider the way I am behaving as criminal and immoral. What more can one
      say than that? But what’s the good of saying what everybody knows?
      Instead of feeding nightingales with paltry words, you had much better
      tell me what I am to do.”
    

      “I’ve told you already—go away.”
    

      “As you know perfectly well, I have gone away five times, and every
      time I turned back on the way. I can show you my through tickets —I’ve
      kept them all. I have not will enough to run away from you! I am
      struggling. I am struggling horribly; but what the devil am I good for if
      I have no backbone, if I am weak, cowardly! I can’t struggle with
      Nature! Do you understand? I cannot! I run away from here, and she holds
      on to me and pulls me back. Contemptible, loathsome weakness!”
    

      Ilyin flushed crimson, got up, and walked up and down by the seat.
    

      “I feel as cross as a dog,” he muttered, clenching his fists.
      “I hate and despise myself! My God! like some depraved schoolboy, I
      am making love to another man’s wife, writing idiotic letters,
      degrading myself . . . ugh!”
    

      Ilyin clutched at his head, grunted, and sat down. “And then your
      insincerity!” he went on bitterly. “If you do dislike my
      disgusting behaviour, why have you come here? What drew you here? In my
      letters I only ask you for a direct, definite answer—yes or no; but
      instead of a direct answer, you contrive every day these ‘chance’
      meetings with me and regale me with copy-book maxims!”
    

      Madame Lubyantsev was frightened and flushed. She suddenly felt the
      awkwardness which a decent woman feels when she is accidentally discovered
      undressed.
    

      “You seem to suspect I am playing with you,” she muttered.
      “I have always given you a direct answer, and . . . only today I’ve
      begged you . . .”
    

      “Ough! as though one begged in such cases! If you were to say
      straight out ‘Get away,’ I should have been gone long ago; but
      you’ve never said that. You’ve never once given me a direct
      answer. Strange indecision! Yes, indeed; either you are playing with me,
      or else . . .”
    

      Ilyin leaned his head on his fists without finishing. Sofya Petrovna began
      going over in her own mind the way she had behaved from beginning to end.
      She remembered that not only in her actions, but even in her secret
      thoughts, she had always been opposed to Ilyin’s love-making; but
      yet she felt there was a grain of truth in the lawyer’s words. But
      not knowing exactly what the truth was, she could not find answers to make
      to Ilyin’s complaint, however hard she thought. It was awkward to be
      silent, and, shrugging her shoulders, she said:
    

      So I am to blame, it appears.”
    

      “I don’t blame you for your insincerity,” sighed Ilyin.
      “I did not mean that when I spoke of it. . . . Your insincerity is
      natural and in the order of things. If people agreed together and suddenly
      became sincere, everything would go to the devil.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna was in no mood for philosophical reflections, but she was
      glad of a chance to change the conversation, and asked:
    

      “But why?”
    

      “Because only savage women and animals are sincere. Once
      civilization has introduced a demand for such comforts as, for instance,
      feminine virtue, sincerity is out of place. . . .”
    

      Ilyin jabbed his stick angrily into the sand. Madame Lubyantsev listened
      to him and liked his conversation, though a great deal of it she did not
      understand. What gratified her most was that she, an ordinary woman, was
      talked to by a talented man on “intellectual” subjects; it
      afforded her great pleasure, too, to watch the working of his mobile,
      young face, which was still pale and angry. She failed to understand a
      great deal that he said, but what was clear to her in his words was the
      attractive boldness with which the modern man without hesitation or doubt
      decides great questions and draws conclusive deductions.
    

      She suddenly realized that she was admiring him, and was alarmed.
    

      “Forgive me, but I don’t understand,” she said
      hurriedly. “What makes you talk of insincerity? I repeat my request
      again: be my good, true friend; let me alone! I beg you most earnestly!”
    

      “Very good; I’ll try again,” sighed Ilyin. “Glad
      to do my best. . . . Only I doubt whether anything will come of my
      efforts. Either I shall put a bullet through my brains or take to drink in
      an idiotic way. I shall come to a bad end! There’s a limit to
      everything— to struggles with Nature, too. Tell me, how can one
      struggle against madness? If you drink wine, how are you to struggle
      against intoxication? What am I to do if your image has grown into my
      soul, and day and night stands persistently before my eyes, like that pine
      there at this moment? Come, tell me, what hard and difficult thing can I
      do to get free from this abominable, miserable condition, in which all my
      thoughts, desires, and dreams are no longer my own, but belong to some
      demon who has taken possession of me? I love you, love you so much that I
      am completely thrown out of gear; I’ve given up my work and all who
      are dear to me; I’ve forgotten my God! I’ve never been in love
      like this in my life.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna, who had not expected such a turn to their conversation,
      drew away from Ilyin and looked into his face in dismay. Tears came into
      his eyes, his lips were quivering, and there was an imploring, hungry
      expression in his face.
    

      “I love you!” he muttered, bringing his eyes near her big,
      frightened eyes. “You are so beautiful! I am in agony now, but I
      swear I would sit here all my life, suffering and looking in your eyes.
      But . . . be silent, I implore you!”
    

      Sofya Petrovna, feeling utterly disconcerted, tried to think as quickly as
      possible of something to say to stop him. “I’ll go away,”
      she decided, but before she had time to make a movement to get up, Ilyin
      was on his knees before her. . . . He was clasping her knees, gazing into
      her face and speaking passionately, hotly, eloquently. In her terror and
      confusion she did not hear his words; for some reason now, at this
      dangerous moment, while her knees were being agreeably squeezed and felt
      as though they were in a warm bath, she was trying, with a sort of angry
      spite, to interpret her own sensations. She was angry that instead of
      brimming over with protesting virtue, she was entirely overwhelmed with
      weakness, apathy, and emptiness, like a drunken man utterly reckless; only
      at the bottom of her soul a remote bit of herself was malignantly taunting
      her: “Why don’t you go? Is this as it should be? Yes?”
    

      Seeking for some explanation, she could not understand how it was she did
      not pull away the hand to which Ilyin was clinging like a leech, and why,
      like Ilyin, she hastily glanced to right and to left to see whether any
      one was looking. The clouds and the pines stood motionless, looking at
      them severely, like old ushers seeing mischief, but bribed not to tell the
      school authorities. The sentry stood like a post on the embankment and
      seemed to be looking at the seat.
    

      “Let him look,” thought Sofya Petrovna.
    

      “But . . . but listen,” she said at last, with despair in her
      voice. “What can come of this? What will be the end of this?”
    

      “I don’t know, I don’t know,” he whispered, waving
      off the disagreeable questions.
    

      They heard the hoarse, discordant whistle of the train. This cold,
      irrelevant sound from the everyday world of prose made Sofya Petrovna
      rouse herself.
    

      “I can’t stay . . . it’s time I was at home,” she
      said, getting up quickly. “The train is coming in. . . Andrey is
      coming by it! He will want his dinner.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna turned towards the embankment with a burning face. The
      engine slowly crawled by, then came the carriages. It was not the local
      train, as she had supposed, but a goods train. The trucks filed by against
      the background of the white church in a long string like the days of a man’s
      life, and it seemed as though it would never end.
    

      But at last the train passed, and the last carriage with the guard and a
      light in it had disappeared behind the trees. Sofya Petrovna turned round
      sharply, and without looking at Ilyin, walked rapidly back along the
      track. She had regained her self-possession. Crimson with shame,
      humiliated not by Ilyin—no, but by her own cowardice, by the
      shamelessness with which she, a chaste and high-principled woman, had
      allowed a man, not her husband, to hug her knees—she had only one
      thought now: to get home as quickly as possible to her villa, to her
      family. The lawyer could hardly keep pace with her. Turning from the
      clearing into a narrow path, she turned round and glanced at him so
      quickly that she saw nothing but the sand on his knees, and waved to him
      to drop behind.
    

      Reaching home, Sofya Petrovna stood in the middle of her room for five
      minutes without moving, and looked first at the window and then at her
      writing-table.
    

      “You low creature!” she said, upbraiding herself. “You
      low creature!”
    

      To spite herself, she recalled in precise detail, keeping nothing back—she
      recalled that though all this time she had been opposed to Ilyin’s
      lovemaking, something had impelled her to seek an interview with him; and
      what was more, when he was at her feet she had enjoyed it enormously. She
      recalled it all without sparing herself, and now, breathless with shame,
      she would have liked to slap herself in the face.
    

      “Poor Andrey!” she said to herself, trying as she thought of
      her husband to put into her face as tender an expression as she could.
      “Varya, my poor little girl, doesn’t know what a mother she
      has! Forgive me, my dear ones! I love you so much . . . so much!”
    

      And anxious to prove to herself that she was still a good wife and mother,
      and that corruption had not yet touched that “sanctity of marriage”
      of which she had spoken to Ilyin, Sofya Petrovna ran to the kitchen and
      abused the cook for not having yet laid the table for Andrey Ilyitch. She
      tried to picture her husband’s hungry and exhausted appearance,
      commiserated him aloud, and laid the table for him with her own hands,
      which she had never done before. Then she found her daughter Varya, picked
      her up in her arms and hugged her warmly; the child seemed to her cold and
      heavy, but she was unwilling to acknowledge this to herself, and she began
      explaining to the child how good, kind, and honourable her papa was.
    

      But when Andrey Ilyitch arrived soon afterwards she hardly greeted him.
      The rush of false feeling had already passed off without proving anything
      to her, only irritating and exasperating her by its falsity. She was
      sitting by the window, feeling miserable and cross. It is only by being in
      trouble that people can understand how far from easy it is to be the
      master of one’s feelings and thoughts. Sofya Petrovna said
      afterwards that there was a tangle within her which it was as difficult to
      unravel as to count a flock of sparrows rapidly flying by. From the fact
      that she was not overjoyed to see her husband, that she did not like his
      manner at dinner, she concluded all of a sudden that she was beginning to
      hate her husband.
    

      Andrey Ilyitch, languid with hunger and exhaustion, fell upon the sausage
      while waiting for the soup to be brought in, and ate it greedily, munching
      noisily and moving his temples.
    

      “My goodness!” thought Sofya Petrovna. “I love and
      respect him, but . . . why does he munch so repulsively?”
    

      The disorder in her thoughts was no less than the disorder in her
      feelings. Like all persons inexperienced in combating unpleasant ideas,
      Madame Lubyantsev did her utmost not to think of her trouble, and the
      harder she tried the more vividly Ilyin, the sand on his knees, the fluffy
      clouds, the train, stood out in her imagination.
    

      “And why did I go there this afternoon like a fool?” she
      thought, tormenting herself. “And am I really so weak that I cannot
      depend upon myself?”
    

      Fear magnifies danger. By the time Andrey Ilyitch was finishing the last
      course, she had firmly made up her mind to tell her husband everything and
      to flee from danger!
    

      “I’ve something serious to say to you, Andrey,” she
      began after dinner while her husband was taking off his coat and boots to
      lie down for a nap.
    

      “Well?”
    

      “Let us leave this place!”
    

      “H’m! . . . Where shall we go? It’s too soon to go back
      to town.”
    

      “No; for a tour or something of that sort.
    

      “For a tour . . .” repeated the notary, stretching. “I
      dream of that myself, but where are we to get the money, and to whom am I
      to leave the office?”
    

      And thinking a little he added:
    

      “Of course, you must be bored. Go by yourself if you like.”
    

      Sofya Petrovna agreed, but at once reflected that Ilyin would be delighted
      with the opportunity, and would go with her in the same train, in the same
      compartment. . . . She thought and looked at her husband, now satisfied
      but still languid. For some reason her eyes rested on his feet—miniature,
      almost feminine feet, clad in striped socks; there was a thread standing
      out at the tip of each sock.
    

      Behind the blind a bumble-bee was beating itself against the window-pane
      and buzzing. Sofya Petrovna looked at the threads on the socks, listened
      to the bee, and pictured how she would set off . . . . vis-Ã -vis
      Ilyin would sit, day and night, never taking his eyes off her, wrathful at
      his own weakness and pale with spiritual agony. He would call himself an
      immoral schoolboy, would abuse her, tear his hair, but when darkness came
      on and the passengers were asleep or got out at a station, he would seize
      the opportunity to kneel before her and embrace her knees as he had at the
      seat in the wood. . . .
    

      She caught herself indulging in this day-dream.
    

      “Listen. I won’t go alone,” she said. “You must
      come with me.”
    

      “Nonsense, Sofotchka!” sighed Lubyantsev. “One must be
      sensible and not want the impossible.”
    

      “You will come when you know all about it,” thought Sofya
      Petrovna.
    

      Making up her mind to go at all costs, she felt that she was out of
      danger. Little by little her ideas grew clearer; her spirits rose and she
      allowed herself to think about it all, feeling that however much she
      thought, however much she dreamed, she would go away. While her husband
      was asleep, the evening gradually came on. She sat in the drawing-room and
      played the piano. The greater liveliness out of doors, the sound of music,
      but above all the thought that she was a sensible person, that she had
      surmounted her difficulties, completely restored her spirits. Other women,
      her appeased conscience told her, would probably have been carried off
      their feet in her position, and would have lost their balance, while she
      had almost died of shame, had been miserable, and was now running out of
      the danger which perhaps did not exist! She was so touched by her own
      virtue and determination that she even looked at herself two or three
      times in the looking-glass.
    

      When it got dark, visitors arrived. The men sat down in the dining-room to
      play cards; the ladies remained in the drawing-room and the verandah. The
      last to arrive was Ilyin. He was gloomy, morose, and looked ill. He sat
      down in the corner of the sofa and did not move the whole evening. Usually
      good-humoured and talkative, this time he remained silent, frowned, and
      rubbed his eyebrows. When he had to answer some question, he gave a forced
      smile with his upper lip only, and answered jerkily and irritably. Four or
      five times he made some jest, but his jests sounded harsh and cutting. It
      seemed to Sofya Petrovna that he was on the verge of hysterics. Only now,
      sitting at the piano, she recognized fully for the first time that this
      unhappy man was in deadly earnest, that his soul was sick, and that he
      could find no rest. For her sake he was wasting the best days of his youth
      and his career, spending the last of his money on a summer villa,
      abandoning his mother and sisters, and, worst of all, wearing himself out
      in an agonizing struggle with himself. From mere common humanity he ought
      to be treated seriously.
    

      She recognized all this clearly till it made her heart ache, and if at
      that moment she had gone up to him and said to him, “No,”
      there would have been a force in her voice hard to disobey. But she did
      not go up to him and did not speak—indeed, never thought of doing
      so. The pettiness and egoism of youth had never been more patent in her
      than that evening. She realized that Ilyin was unhappy, and that he was
      sitting on the sofa as though he were on hot coals; she felt sorry for
      him, but at the same time the presence of a man who loved her to
      distraction, filled her soul with triumph and a sense of her own power.
      She felt her youth, her beauty, and her unassailable virtue, and, since
      she had decided to go away, gave herself full licence for that evening.
      She flirted, laughed incessantly, sang with peculiar feeling and gusto.
      Everything delighted and amused her. She was amused at the memory of what
      had happened at the seat in the wood, of the sentinel who had looked on.
      She was amused by her guests, by Ilyin’s cutting jests, by the pin
      in his cravat, which she had never noticed before. There was a red snake
      with diamond eyes on the pin; this snake struck her as so amusing that she
      could have kissed it on the spot.
    

      Sofya Petrovna sang nervously, with defiant recklessness as though half
      intoxicated, and she chose sad, mournful songs which dealt with wasted
      hopes, the past, old age, as though in mockery of another’s grief.
      “‘And old age comes nearer and nearer’ . . .” she
      sang. And what was old age to her?
    

      “It seems as though there is something going wrong with me,”
      she thought from time to time through her laughter and singing.
    

      The party broke up at twelve o’clock. Ilyin was the last to leave.
      Sofya Petrovna was still reckless enough to accompany him to the bottom
      step of the verandah. She wanted to tell him that she was going away with
      her husband, and to watch the effect this news would produce on him.
    

      The moon was hidden behind the clouds, but it was light enough for Sofya
      Petrovna to see how the wind played with the skirts of his overcoat and
      with the awning of the verandah. She could see, too, how white Ilyin was,
      and how he twisted his upper lip in the effort to smile.
    

      “Sonia, Sonitchka . . . my darling woman!” he muttered,
      preventing her from speaking. “My dear! my sweet!”
    

      In a rush of tenderness, with tears in his voice, he showered caressing
      words upon her, that grew tenderer and tenderer, and even called her
      “thou,” as though she were his wife or mistress. Quite
      unexpectedly he put one arm round her waist and with the other hand took
      hold of her elbow.
    

      “My precious! my delight!” he whispered, kissing the nape of
      her neck; “be sincere; come to me at once!”
    

      She slipped out of his arms and raised her head to give vent to her
      indignation and anger, but the indignation did not come off, and all her
      vaunted virtue and chastity was only sufficient to enable her to utter the
      phrase used by all ordinary women on such occasions:
    

      “You must be mad.”
    

      “Come, let us go,” Ilyin continued. “I felt just now, as
      well as at the seat in the wood, that you are as helpless as I am, Sonia .
      . . . You are in the same plight! You love me and are fruitlessly trying
      to appease your conscience. . . .”
    

      Seeing that she was moving away, he caught her by her lace cuff and said
      rapidly:
    

      “If not today, then tomorrow you will have to give in! Why, then,
      this waste of time? My precious, darling Sonia, the sentence is passed;
      why put off the execution? Why deceive yourself?”
    

      Sofya Petrovna tore herself from him and darted in at the door. Returning
      to the drawing-room, she mechanically shut the piano, looked for a long
      time at the music-stand, and sat down. She could not stand up nor think.
      All that was left of her excitement and recklessness was a fearful
      weakness, apathy, and dreariness. Her conscience whispered to her that she
      had behaved badly, foolishly, that evening, like some madcap girl—that
      she had just been embraced on the verandah, and still had an uneasy
      feeling in her waist and her elbow. There was not a soul in the
      drawing-room; there was only one candle burning. Madame Lubyantsev sat on
      the round stool before the piano, motionless, as though expecting
      something. And as though taking advantage of the darkness and her extreme
      lassitude, an oppressive, overpowering desire began to assail her. Like a
      boa-constrictor it gripped her limbs and her soul, and grew stronger every
      second, and no longer menaced her as it had done, but stood clear before
      her in all its nakedness.
    

      She sat for half an hour without stirring, not restraining herself from
      thinking of Ilyin, then she got up languidly and dragged herself to her
      bedroom. Andrey Ilyitch was already in bed. She sat down by the open
      window and gave herself up to desire. There was no “tangle”
      now in her head; all her thoughts and feelings were bent with one accord
      upon a single aim. She tried to struggle against it, but instantly gave it
      up. . . . She understood now how strong and relentless was the foe.
      Strength and fortitude were needed to combat him, and her birth, her
      education, and her life had given her nothing to fall back upon.
    

      “Immoral wretch! Low creature!” she nagged at herself for her
      weakness. “So that’s what you’re like!”
    

      Her outraged sense of propriety was moved to such indignation by this
      weakness that she lavished upon herself every term of abuse she knew, and
      told herself many offensive and humiliating truths. So, for instance, she
      told herself that she never had been moral, that she had not come to grief
      before simply because she had had no opportunity, that her inward conflict
      during that day had all been a farce. . . .
    

      “And even if I have struggled,” she thought, “what sort
      of struggle was it? Even the woman who sells herself struggles before she
      brings herself to it, and yet she sells herself. A fine struggle! Like
      milk, I’ve turned in a day! In one day!”
    

      She convicted herself of being tempted, not by feeling, not by Ilyin
      personally, but by sensations which awaited her . . . an idle lady, having
      her fling in the summer holidays, like so many!
    

      “‘Like an unfledged bird when the mother has been slain,’”
      sang a husky tenor outside the window.
    

      “If I am to go, it’s time,” thought Sofya Petrovna. Her
      heart suddenly began beating violently.
    

      “Andrey!” she almost shrieked. “Listen! we . . . we are
      going? Yes?”
    

      “Yes, I’ve told you already: you go alone.”
    

      “But listen,” she began. “If you don’t go with me,
      you are in danger of losing me. I believe I am . . . in love already.”
    

      “With whom?” asked Andrey Ilyitch.
    

      “It can’t make any difference to you who it is!” cried
      Sofya Petrovna.
    

      Andrey Ilyitch sat up with his feet out of bed and looked wonderingly at
      his wife’s dark figure.
    

      “It’s a fancy!” he yawned.
    

      He did not believe her, but yet he was frightened. After thinking a little
      and asking his wife several unimportant questions, he delivered himself of
      his opinions on the family, on infidelity . . . spoke listlessly for about
      ten minutes and got into bed again. His moralizing produced no effect.
      There are a great many opinions in the world, and a good half of them are
      held by people who have never been in trouble!
    

      In spite of the late hour, summer visitors were still walking outside.
      Sofya Petrovna put on a light cape, stood a little, thought a little. . .
      . She still had resolution enough to say to her sleeping husband:
    

      “Are you asleep? I am going for a walk. . . . Will you come with me?”
    

      That was her last hope. Receiving no answer, she went out. . . . It was
      fresh and windy. She was conscious neither of the wind nor the darkness,
      but went on and on. . . . An overmastering force drove her on, and it
      seemed as though, if she had stopped, it would have pushed her in the
      back.
    

      “Immoral creature!” she muttered mechanically. “Low
      wretch!”
    

      She was breathless, hot with shame, did not feel her legs under her, but
      what drove her on was stronger than shame, reason, or fear.
    











      A TRIFLE FROM LIFE
    

A WELL-FED,
      red-cheeked young man called Nikolay Ilyitch Belyaev, of thirty-two, who
      was an owner of house property in Petersburg, and a devotee of the
      race-course, went one evening to see Olga Ivanovna Irnin, with whom he was
      living, or, to use his own expression, was dragging out a long, wearisome
      romance. And, indeed, the first interesting and enthusiastic pages of this
      romance had long been perused; now the pages dragged on, and still dragged
      on, without presenting anything new or of interest.
    

      Not finding Olga Ivanovna at home, my hero lay down on the lounge chair
      and proceeded to wait for her in the drawing-room.
    

      “Good-evening, Nikolay Ilyitch!” he heard a child’s
      voice. “Mother will be here directly. She has gone with Sonia to the
      dressmaker’s.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna’s son, Alyosha—a boy of eight who looked
      graceful and very well cared for, who was dressed like a picture, in a
      black velvet jacket and long black stockings—was lying on the sofa
      in the same room. He was lying on a satin cushion and, evidently imitating
      an acrobat he had lately seen at the circus, stuck up in the air first one
      leg and then the other. When his elegant legs were exhausted, he brought
      his arms into play or jumped up impulsively and went on all fours, trying
      to stand with his legs in the air. All this he was doing with the utmost
      gravity, gasping and groaning painfully as though he regretted that God
      had given him such a restless body.
    

      “Ah, good-evening, my boy,” said Belyaev. “It’s
      you! I did not notice you. Is your mother well?”
    

      Alyosha, taking hold of the tip of his left toe with his right hand and
      falling into the most unnatural attitude, turned over, jumped up, and
      peeped at Belyaev from behind the big fluffy lampshade.
    

      “What shall I say?” he said, shrugging his shoulders. “In
      reality mother’s never well. You see, she is a woman, and women,
      Nikolay Ilyitch, have always something the matter with them.”
    

      Belyaev, having nothing better to do, began watching Alyosha’s face.
      He had never before during the whole of his intimacy with Olga Ivanovna
      paid any attention to the boy, and had completely ignored his existence;
      the boy had been before his eyes, but he had not cared to think why he was
      there and what part he was playing.
    

      In the twilight of the evening, Alyosha’s face, with his white
      forehead and black, unbClinking eyes, unexpectedly reminded Belyaev of
      Olga Ivanovna as she had been during the first pages of their romance. And
      he felt disposed to be friendly to the boy.
    

      “Come here, insect,” he said; “let me have a closer look
      at you.”
    

      The boy jumped off the sofa and skipped up to Belyaev.
    

      “Well,” began Nikolay Ilyitch, putting a hand on the boy’s
      thin shoulder. “How are you getting on?”
    

      “How shall I say! We used to get on a great deal better.”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “It’s very simple. Sonia and I used only to learn music and
      reading, and now they give us French poetry to learn. Have you been shaved
      lately?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Yes, I see you have. Your beard is shorter. Let me touch it. . . .
      Does that hurt?”
    

      “No.”
    

      “Why is it that if you pull one hair it hurts, but if you pull a lot
      at once it doesn’t hurt a bit? Ha, ha! And, you know, it’s a
      pity you don’t have whiskers. Here ought to be shaved . . . but here
      at the sides the hair ought to be left. . . .”
    

      The boy nestled up to Belyaev and began playing with his watch-chain.
    

      “When I go to the high-school,” he said, “mother is
      going to buy me a watch. I shall ask her to buy me a watch-chain like
      this. . . . Wh-at a lo-ket! Father’s got a locket like that, only
      yours has little bars on it and his has letters. . . . There’s
      mother’s portrait in the middle of his. Father has a different sort
      of chain now, not made with rings, but like ribbon. . . .”
    

      “How do you know? Do you see your father?”
    

      “I? M’m . . . no . . . I . . .”
    

      Alyosha blushed, and in great confusion, feeling caught in a lie, began
      zealously scratching the locket with his nail. . . . Belyaev looked
      steadily into his face and asked:
    

      “Do you see your father?”
    

      “N-no!”
    

      “Come, speak frankly, on your honour. . . . I see from your face you
      are telling a fib. Once you’ve let a thing slip out it’s no
      good wriggling about it. Tell me, do you see him? Come, as a friend.”
    

      Alyosha hesitated.
    

      “You won’t tell mother?” he said.
    

      “As though I should!”
    

      “On your honour?”
    

      “On my honour.”
    

      “Do you swear?”
    

      “Ah, you provoking boy! What do you take me for?”
    

      Alyosha looked round him, then with wide-open eyes, whispered to him:
    

      “Only, for goodness’ sake, don’t tell mother. . . . Don’t
      tell any one at all, for it is a secret. I hope to goodness mother won’t
      find out, or we should all catch it—Sonia, and I, and Pelagea . . .
      . Well, listen. . . Sonia and I see father every Tuesday and Friday. When
      Pelagea takes us for a walk before dinner we go to the Apfel Restaurant,
      and there is father waiting for us. . . . He is always sitting in a room
      apart, where you know there’s a marble table and an ash-tray in the
      shape of a goose without a back. . . .”
    

      “What do you do there?”
    

      “Nothing! First we say how-do-you-do, then we all sit round the
      table, and father treats us with coffee and pies. You know Sonia eats the
      meat-pies, but I can’t endure meat-pies! I like the pies made of
      cabbage and eggs. We eat such a lot that we have to try hard to eat as
      much as we can at dinner, for fear mother should notice.”
    

      “What do you talk about?”
    

      “With father? About anything. He kisses us, he hugs us, tells us all
      sorts of amusing jokes. Do you know, he says when we are grown up he is
      going to take us to live with him. Sonia does not want to go, but I agree.
      Of course, I should miss mother; but, then, I should write her letters! It’s
      a queer idea, but we could come and visit her on holidays—couldn’t
      we? Father says, too, that he will buy me a horse. He’s an awfully
      kind man! I can’t understand why mother does not ask him to come and
      live with us, and why she forbids us to see him. You know he loves mother
      very much. He is always asking us how she is and what she is doing. When
      she was ill he clutched his head like this, and . . . and kept running
      about. He always tells us to be obedient and respectful to her. Listen. Is
      it true that we are unfortunate?”
    

      “H’m! . . . Why?”
    

      “That’s what father says. ‘You are unhappy children,’
      he says. It’s strange to hear him, really. ‘You are unhappy,’
      he says, ‘I am unhappy, and mother’s unhappy. You must pray to
      God,’ he says; ‘for yourselves and for her.’”
    

      Alyosha let his eyes rest on a stuffed bird and sank into thought.
    

      “So . . .” growled Belyaev. “So that’s how you are
      going on. You arrange meetings at restaurants. And mother does not know?”
    

      “No-o. . . . How should she know? Pelagea would not tell her for
      anything, you know. The day before yesterday he gave us some pears. As
      sweet as jam! I ate two.”
    

      “H’m! . . . Well, and I say . . Listen. Did father say
      anything about me?”
    

      “About you? What shall I say?”
    

      Alyosha looked searchingly into Belyaev’s face and shrugged his
      shoulders.
    

      “He didn’t say anything particular.”
    

      “For instance, what did he say?”
    

      “You won’t be offended?”
    

      “What next? Why, does he abuse me?”
    

      “He doesn’t abuse you, but you know he is angry with you. He
      says mother’s unhappy owing to you . . . and that you have ruined
      mother. You know he is so queer! I explain to him that you are kind, that
      you never scold mother; but he only shakes his head.”
    

      “So he says I have ruined her?”
    

      “Yes; you mustn’t be offended, Nikolay Ilyitch.”
    

      Belyaev got up, stood still a moment, and walked up and down the
      drawing-room.
    

      “That’s strange and . . . ridiculous!” he muttered,
      shrugging his shoulders and smiling sarcastically. “He’s
      entirely to blame, and I have ruined her, eh? An innocent lamb, I must
      say. So he told you I ruined your mother?”
    

      “Yes, but . . . you said you would not be offended, you know.”
    

      “I am not offended, and . . . and it’s not your business. Why,
      it’s . . . why, it’s positively ridiculous! I have been thrust
      into it like a chicken in the broth, and now it seems I’m to blame!”
    

      A ring was heard. The boy sprang up from his place and ran out. A minute
      later a lady came into the room with a little girl; this was Olga
      Ivanovna, Alyosha’s mother. Alyosha followed them in, skipping and
      jumping, humming aloud and waving his hands. Belyaev nodded, and went on
      walking up and down.
    

      “Of course, whose fault is it if not mine?” he muttered with a
      snort. “He is right! He is an injured husband.”
    

      “What are you talking about?” asked Olga Ivanovna.
    

      “What about? . . . Why, just listen to the tales your lawful spouse
      is spreading now! It appears that I am a scoundrel and a villain, that I
      have ruined you and the children. All of you are unhappy, and I am the
      only happy one! Wonderfully, wonderfully happy!”
    

      “I don’t understand, Nikolay. What’s the matter?”
    

      “Why, listen to this young gentleman!” said Belyaev, pointing
      to Alyosha.
    

      Alyosha flushed crimson, then turned pale, and his whole face began
      working with terror.
    

      “Nikolay Ilyitch,” he said in a loud whisper. “Sh-sh!”
    

      Olga Ivanovna looked in surprise at Alyosha, then at Belyaev, then at
      Alyosha again.
    

      “Just ask him,” Belyaev went on. “Your Pelagea, like a
      regular fool, takes them about to restaurants and arranges meetings with
      their papa. But that’s not the point: the point is that their dear
      papa is a victim, while I’m a wretch who has broken up both your
      lives. . .”
    

      “Nikolay Ilyitch,” moaned Alyosha. “Why, you promised on
      your word of honour!”
    

      “Oh, get away!” said Belyaev, waving him off. “This is
      more important than any word of honour. It’s the hypocrisy revolts
      me, the lying! . . .”
    

      “I don’t understand it,” said Olga Ivanovna, and tears
      glistened in her eyes. “Tell me, Alyosha,” she turned to her
      son. “Do you see your father?”
    

      Alyosha did not hear her; he was looking with horror at Belyaev.
    

      “It’s impossible,” said his mother; “I will go and
      question Pelagea.”
    

      Olga Ivanovna went out.
    

      “I say, you promised on your word of honour!” said Alyosha,
      trembling all over.
    

      Belyaev dismissed him with a wave of his hand, and went on walking up and
      down. He was absorbed in his grievance and was oblivious of the boy’s
      presence, as he always had been. He, a grownup, serious person, had no
      thought to spare for boys. And Alyosha sat down in the corner and told
      Sonia with horror how he had been deceived. He was trembling, stammering,
      and crying. It was the first time in his life that he had been brought
      into such coarse contact with lying; till then he had not known that there
      are in the world, besides sweet pears, pies, and expensive watches, a
      great many things for which the language of children has no expression.
    








      The Cook's Wedding and Other Stories
    











      THE COOK’S WEDDING
    

GRISHA, a fat,
      solemn little person of seven, was standing by the kitchen door listening
      and peeping through the keyhole. In the kitchen something extraordinary,
      and in his opinion never seen before, was taking place. A big, thick-set,
      red-haired peasant, with a beard, and a drop of perspiration on his nose,
      wearing a cabman’s full coat, was sitting at the kitchen table on
      which they chopped the meat and sliced the onions. He was balancing a
      saucer on the five fingers of his right hand and drinking tea out of it,
      and crunching sugar so loudly that it sent a shiver down Grisha’s
      back. Aksinya Stepanovna, the old nurse, was sitting on the dirty stool
      facing him, and she, too, was drinking tea. Her face was grave, though at
      the same time it beamed with a kind of triumph. Pelageya, the cook, was
      busy at the stove, and was apparently trying to hide her face. And on her
      face Grisha saw a regular illumination: it was burning and shifting
      through every shade of colour, beginning with a crimson purple and ending
      with a deathly white. She was continually catching hold of knives, forks,
      bits of wood, and rags with trembling hands, moving, grumbling to herself,
      making a clatter, but in reality doing nothing. She did not once glance at
      the table at which they were drinking tea, and to the questions put to her
      by the nurse she gave jerky, sullen answers without turning her face.
    

      “Help yourself, Danilo Semyonitch,” the nurse urged him
      hospitably. “Why do you keep on with tea and nothing but tea? You
      should have a drop of vodka!”
    

      And nurse put before the visitor a bottle of vodka and a wine-glass, while
      her face wore a very wily expression.
    

      “I never touch it. . . . No . . .” said the cabman, declining.
      “Don’t press me, Aksinya Stepanovna.”
    

      “What a man! . . . A cabman and not drink! . . . A bachelor can’t
      get on without drinking. Help yourself!”
    

      The cabman looked askance at the bottle, then at nurse’s wily face,
      and his own face assumed an expression no less cunning, as much as to say,
      “You won’t catch me, you old witch!”
    

      “I don’t drink; please excuse me. Such a weakness does not do
      in our calling. A man who works at a trade may drink, for he sits at home,
      but we cabmen are always in view of the public. Aren’t we? If one
      goes into a pothouse one finds one’s horse gone; if one takes a drop
      too much it is worse still; before you know where you are you will fall
      asleep or slip off the box. That’s where it is.”
    

      “And how much do you make a day, Danilo Semyonitch?”
    

      “That’s according. One day you will have a fare for three
      roubles, and another day you will come back to the yard without a
      farthing. The days are very different. Nowadays our business is no good.
      There are lots and lots of cabmen as you know, hay is dear, and folks are
      paltry nowadays and always contriving to go by tram. And yet, thank God, I
      have nothing to complain of. I have plenty to eat and good clothes to
      wear, and . . . we could even provide well for another. . .” (the
      cabman stole a glance at Pelageya) “if it were to their liking. . .
      .”
    

      Grisha did not hear what was said further. His mamma came to the door and
      sent him to the nursery to learn his lessons.
    

      “Go and learn your lesson. It’s not your business to listen
      here!”
    

      When Grisha reached the nursery, he put “My Own Book” in front
      of him, but he did not get on with his reading. All that he had just seen
      and heard aroused a multitude of questions in his mind.
    

      “The cook’s going to be married,” he thought. “Strange—I
      don’t understand what people get married for. Mamma was married to
      papa, Cousin Verotchka to Pavel Andreyitch. But one might be married to
      papa and Pavel Andreyitch after all: they have gold watch-chains and nice
      suits, their boots are always polished; but to marry that dreadful cabman
      with a red nose and felt boots. . . . Fi! And why is it nurse wants poor
      Pelageya to be married?”
    

      When the visitor had gone out of the kitchen, Pelageya appeared and began
      clearing away. Her agitation still persisted. Her face was red and looked
      scared. She scarcely touched the floor with the broom, and swept every
      corner five times over. She lingered for a long time in the room where
      mamma was sitting. She was evidently oppressed by her isolation, and she
      was longing to express herself, to share her impressions with some one, to
      open her heart.
    

      “He’s gone,” she muttered, seeing that mamma would not
      begin the conversation.
    

      “One can see he is a good man,” said mamma, not taking her
      eyes off her sewing. “Sober and steady.”
    

      “I declare I won’t marry him, mistress!” Pelageya cried
      suddenly, flushing crimson. “I declare I won’t!”
    

      “Don’t be silly; you are not a child. It’s a serious
      step; you must think it over thoroughly, it’s no use talking
      nonsense. Do you like him?”
    

      “What an idea, mistress!” cried Pelageya, abashed. “They
      say such things that . . . my goodness. . . .”
    

      “She should say she doesn’t like him!” thought Grisha.
    

      “What an affected creature you are. . . . Do you like him?”
    

      “But he is old, mistress!”
    

      “Think of something else,” nurse flew out at her from the next
      room. “He has not reached his fortieth year; and what do you want a
      young man for? Handsome is as handsome does. . . . Marry him and that’s
      all about it!”
    

      “I swear I won’t,” squealed Pelageya.
    

      “You are talking nonsense. What sort of rascal do you want? Anyone
      else would have bowed down to his feet, and you declare you won’t
      marry him. You want to be always winking at the postmen and tutors. That
      tutor that used to come to Grishenka, mistress . . . she was never tired
      of making eyes at him. O-o, the shameless hussy!”
    

      “Have you seen this Danilo before?” mamma asked Pelageya.
    

      “How could I have seen him? I set eyes on him to-day for the first
      time. Aksinya picked him up and brought him along . . . the accursed
      devil. . . . And where has he come from for my undoing!”
    

      At dinner, when Pelageya was handing the dishes, everyone looked into her
      face and teased her about the cabman. She turned fearfully red, and went
      off into a forced giggle.
    

      “It must be shameful to get married,” thought Grisha. “Terribly
      shameful.”
    

      All the dishes were too salt, and blood oozed from the half-raw chickens,
      and, to cap it all, plates and knives kept dropping out of Pelageya’s
      hands during dinner, as though from a shelf that had given way; but no one
      said a word of blame to her, as they all understood the state of her
      feelings. Only once papa flicked his table-napkin angrily and said to
      mamma:
    

      “What do you want to be getting them all married for? What business
      is it of yours? Let them get married of themselves if they want to.”
    

      After dinner, neighbouring cooks and maidservants kept flitting into the
      kitchen, and there was the sound of whispering till late evening. How they
      had scented out the matchmaking, God knows. When Grisha woke in the night
      he heard his nurse and the cook whispering together in the nursery. Nurse
      was talking persuasively, while the cook alternately sobbed and giggled.
      When he fell asleep after this, Grisha dreamed of Pelageya being carried
      off by Tchernomor and a witch.
    

      Next day there was a calm. The life of the kitchen went on its accustomed
      way as though the cabman did not exist. Only from time to time nurse put
      on her new shawl, assumed a solemn and austere air, and went off somewhere
      for an hour or two, obviously to conduct negotiations. . . . Pelageya did
      not see the cabman, and when his name was mentioned she flushed up and
      cried:
    

      “May he be thrice damned! As though I should be thinking of him!
      Tfoo!”
    

      In the evening mamma went into the kitchen, while nurse and Pelageya were
      zealously mincing something, and said:
    

      “You can marry him, of course—that’s your business—but
      I must tell you, Pelageya, that he cannot live here. . . . You know I don’t
      like to have anyone sitting in the kitchen. Mind now, remember . . . . And
      I can’t let you sleep out.”
    

      “Goodness knows! What an idea, mistress!” shrieked the cook.
      “Why do you keep throwing him up at me? Plague take him! He’s
      a regular curse, confound him! . . .”
    

      Glancing one Sunday morning into the kitchen, Grisha was struck dumb with
      amazement. The kitchen was crammed full of people. Here were cooks from
      the whole courtyard, the porter, two policemen, a non-commissioned officer
      with good-conduct stripes, and the boy Filka. . . . This Filka was
      generally hanging about the laundry playing with the dogs; now he was
      combed and washed, and was holding an ikon in a tinfoil setting. Pelageya
      was standing in the middle of the kitchen in a new cotton dress, with a
      flower on her head. Beside her stood the cabman. The happy pair were red
      in the face and perspiring and bDlinking with embarrassment.
    

      “Well . . . I fancy it is time,” said the non-commissioned
      officer, after a prolonged silence.
    

      Pelageya’s face worked all over and she began blubbering. . . .
    

      The soldier took a big loaf from the table, stood beside nurse, and began
      blessing the couple. The cabman went up to the soldier, flopped down on
      his knees, and gave a smacking kiss on his hand. He did the same before
      nurse. Pelageya followed him mechanically, and she too bowed down to the
      ground. At last the outer door was opened, there was a whiff of white
      mist, and the whole party flocked noisily out of the kitchen into the
      yard.
    

      “Poor thing, poor thing,” thought Grisha, hearing the sobs of
      the cook. “Where have they taken her? Why don’t papa and mamma
      protect her?”
    

      After the wedding there was singing and concertina-playing in the laundry
      till late evening. Mamma was cross all the evening because nurse smelt of
      vodka, and owing to the wedding there was no one to heat the samovar.
      Pelageya had not come back by the time Grisha went to bed.
    

      “The poor thing is crying somewhere in the dark!” he thought.
      “While the cabman is saying to her ‘shut up!’”
    

      Next morning the cook was in the kitchen again. The cabman came in for a
      minute. He thanked mamma, and glancing sternly at Pelageya, said:
    

      “Will you look after her, madam? Be a father and a mother to her.
      And you, too, Aksinya Stepanovna, do not forsake her, see that everything
      is as it should be . . . without any nonsense. . . . And also, madam, if
      you would kindly advance me five roubles of her wages. I have got to buy a
      new horse-collar.”
    

      Again a problem for Grisha: Pelageya was living in freedom, doing as she
      liked, and not having to account to anyone for her actions, and all at
      once, for no sort of reason, a stranger turns up, who has somehow acquired
      rights over her conduct and her property! Grisha was distressed. He longed
      passionately, almost to tears, to comfort this victim, as he supposed, of
      man’s injustice. Picking out the very biggest apple in the
      store-room he stole into the kitchen, slipped it into Pelageya’s
      hand, and darted headlong away.
    











      SLEEPY
    

NIGHT. Varka, the
      little nurse, a girl of thirteen, is rocking the cradle in which the baby
      is lying, and humming hardly audibly:
    

                “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee,
                 While I sing a song for thee.”
 

      A little green lamp is burning before the ikon; there is a string
      stretched from one end of the room to the other, on which baby-clothes and
      a pair of big black trousers are hanging. There is a big patch of green on
      the ceiling from the ikon lamp, and the baby-clothes and the trousers
      throw long shadows on the stove, on the cradle, and on Varka. . . . When
      the lamp begins to flicker, the green patch and the shadows come to life,
      and are set in motion, as though by the wind. It is stuffy. There is a
      smell of cabbage soup, and of the inside of a boot-shop.
    

      The baby’s crying. For a long while he has been hoarse and exhausted
      with crying; but he still goes on screaming, and there is no knowing when
      he will stop. And Varka is sleepy. Her eyes are glued together, her head
      droops, her neck aches. She cannot move her eyelids or her lips, and she
      feels as though her face is dried and wooden, as though her head has
      become as small as the head of a pin.
    

      “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee,” she hums, “while I cook the
      groats for thee. . . .”
    

      A cricket is churring in the stove. Through the door in the next room the
      master and the apprentice Afanasy are snoring. . . . The cradle creaks
      plaintively, Varka murmurs—and it all blends into that soothing
      music of the night to which it is so sweet to listen, when one is lying in
      bed. Now that music is merely irritating and oppressive, because it goads
      her to sleep, and she must not sleep; if Varka—God forbid!—should
      fall asleep, her master and mistress would beat her.
    

      The lamp flickers. The patch of green and the shadows are set in motion,
      forcing themselves on Varka’s fixed, half-open eyes, and in her half
      slumbering brain are fashioned into misty visions. She sees dark clouds
      chasing one another over the sky, and screaming like the baby. But then
      the wind blows, the clouds are gone, and Varka sees a broad high road
      covered with liquid mud; along the high road stretch files of wagons,
      while people with wallets on their backs are trudging along and shadows
      flit backwards and forwards; on both sides she can see forests through the
      cold harsh mist. All at once the people with their wallets and their
      shadows fall on the ground in the liquid mud. “What is that for?”
      Varka asks. “To sleep, to sleep!” they answer her. And they
      fall sound asleep, and sleep sweetly, while crows and magpies sit on the
      telegraph wires, scream like the baby, and try to wake them.
    

      “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee, and I will sing a song to thee,”
      murmurs Varka, and now she sees herself in a dark stuffy hut.
    

      Her dead father, Yefim Stepanov, is tossing from side to side on the
      floor. She does not see him, but she hears him moaning and rolling on the
      floor from pain. “His guts have burst,” as he says; the pain
      is so violent that he cannot utter a single word, and can only draw in his
      breath and clack his teeth like the rattling of a drum:
    

      “Boo—boo—boo—boo. . . .”
    

      Her mother, Pelageya, has run to the master’s house to say that
      Yefim is dying. She has been gone a long time, and ought to be back. Varka
      lies awake on the stove, and hears her father’s “boo—boo—boo.”
      And then she hears someone has driven up to the hut. It is a young doctor
      from the town, who has been sent from the big house where he is staying on
      a visit. The doctor comes into the hut; he cannot be seen in the darkness,
      but he can be heard coughing and rattling the door.
    

      “Light a candle,” he says.
    

      “Boo—boo—boo,” answers Yefim.
    

      Pelageya rushes to the stove and begins looking for the broken pot with
      the matches. A minute passes in silence. The doctor, feeling in his
      pocket, lights a match.
    

      “In a minute, sir, in a minute,” says Pelageya. She rushes out
      of the hut, and soon afterwards comes back with a bit of candle.
    

      Yefim’s cheeks are rosy and his eyes are shining, and there is a
      peculiar keenness in his glance, as though he were seeing right through
      the hut and the doctor.
    

      “Come, what is it? What are you thinking about?” says the
      doctor, bending down to him. “Aha! have you had this long?”
    

      “What? Dying, your honour, my hour has come. . . . I am not to stay
      among the living.”
    

      “Don’t talk nonsense! We will cure you!”
    

      “That’s as you please, your honour, we humbly thank you, only
      we understand. . . . Since death has come, there it is.”
    

      The doctor spends a quarter of an hour over Yefim, then he gets up and
      says:
    

      “I can do nothing. You must go into the hospital, there they will
      operate on you. Go at once . . . You must go! It’s rather late, they
      will all be asleep in the hospital, but that doesn’t matter, I will
      give you a note. Do you hear?”
    

      “Kind sir, but what can he go in?” says Pelageya. “We
      have no horse.”
    

      “Never mind. I’ll ask your master, he’ll let you have a
      horse.”
    

      The doctor goes away, the candle goes out, and again there is the sound of
      “boo—boo—boo.” Half an hour later someone drives
      up to the hut. A cart has been sent to take Yefim to the hospital. He gets
      ready and goes. . . .
    

      But now it is a clear bright morning. Pelageya is not at home; she has
      gone to the hospital to find what is being done to Yefim. Somewhere there
      is a baby crying, and Varka hears someone singing with her own voice:
    

      “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee, I will sing a song to thee.”
    

      Pelageya comes back; she crosses herself and whispers:
    

      “They put him to rights in the night, but towards morning he gave up
      his soul to God. . . . The Kingdom of Heaven be his and peace everlasting.
      . . . They say he was taken too late. . . . He ought to have gone sooner.
      . . .”
    

      Varka goes out into the road and cries there, but all at once someone hits
      her on the back of her head so hard that her forehead knocks against a
      birch tree. She raises her eyes, and sees facing her, her master, the
      shoemaker.
    

      “What are you about, you scabby slut?” he says. “The
      child is crying, and you are asleep!”
    

      He gives her a sharp slap behind the ear, and she shakes her head, rocks
      the cradle, and murmurs her song. The green patch and the shadows from the
      trousers and the baby-clothes move up and down, nod to her, and soon take
      possession of her brain again. Again she sees the high road covered with
      liquid mud. The people with wallets on their backs and the shadows have
      lain down and are fast asleep. Looking at them, Varka has a passionate
      longing for sleep; she would lie down with enjoyment, but her mother
      Pelageya is walking beside her, hurrying her on. They are hastening
      together to the town to find situations.
    

      “Give alms, for Christ’s sake!” her mother begs of the
      people they meet. “Show us the Divine Mercy, kind-hearted
      gentlefolk!”
    

      “Give the baby here!” a familiar voice answers. “Give
      the baby here!” the same voice repeats, this time harshly and
      angrily. “Are you asleep, you wretched girl?”
    

      Varka jumps up, and looking round grasps what is the matter: there is no
      high road, no Pelageya, no people meeting them, there is only her
      mistress, who has come to feed the baby, and is standing in the middle of
      the room. While the stout, broad-shouldered woman nurses the child and
      soothes it, Varka stands looking at her and waiting till she has done. And
      outside the windows the air is already turning blue, the shadows and the
      green patch on the ceiling are visibly growing pale, it will soon be
      morning.
    

      “Take him,” says her mistress, buttoning up her chemise over
      her bosom; “he is crying. He must be bewitched.”
    

      Varka takes the baby, puts him in the cradle and begins rocking it again.
      The green patch and the shadows gradually disappear, and now there is
      nothing to force itself on her eyes and cloud her brain. But she is as
      sleepy as before, fearfully sleepy! Varka lays her head on the edge of the
      cradle, and rocks her whole body to overcome her sleepiness, but yet her
      eyes are glued together, and her head is heavy.
    

      “Varka, heat the stove!” she hears the master’s voice
      through the door.
    

      So it is time to get up and set to work. Varka leaves the cradle, and runs
      to the shed for firewood. She is glad. When one moves and runs about, one
      is not so sleepy as when one is sitting down. She brings the wood, heats
      the stove, and feels that her wooden face is getting supple again, and
      that her thoughts are growing clearer.
    

      “Varka, set the samovar!” shouts her mistress.
    

      Varka splits a piece of wood, but has scarcely time to light the splinters
      and put them in the samovar, when she hears a fresh order:
    

      “Varka, clean the master’s goloshes!”
    

      She sits down on the floor, cleans the goloshes, and thinks how nice it
      would be to put her head into a big deep golosh, and have a little nap in
      it. . . . And all at once the golosh grows, swells, fills up the whole
      room. Varka drops the brush, but at once shakes her head, opens her eyes
      wide, and tries to look at things so that they may not grow big and move
      before her eyes.
    

      “Varka, wash the steps outside; I am ashamed for the customers to
      see them!”
    

      Varka washes the steps, sweeps and dusts the rooms, then heats another
      stove and runs to the shop. There is a great deal of work: she hasn’t
      one minute free.
    

      But nothing is so hard as standing in the same place at the kitchen table
      peeling potatoes. Her head droops over the table, the potatoes dance
      before her eyes, the knife tumbles out of her hand while her fat, angry
      mistress is moving about near her with her sleeves tucked up, talking so
      loud that it makes a ringing in Varka’s ears. It is agonising, too,
      to wait at dinner, to wash, to sew, there are minutes when she longs to
      flop on to the floor regardless of everything, and to sleep.
    

      The day passes. Seeing the windows getting dark, Varka presses her temples
      that feel as though they were made of wood, and smiles, though she does
      not know why. The dusk of evening caresses her eyes that will hardly keep
      open, and promises her sound sleep soon. In the evening visitors come.
    

      “Varka, set the samovar!” shouts her mistress. The samovar is
      a little one, and before the visitors have drunk all the tea they want,
      she has to heat it five times. After tea Varka stands for a whole hour on
      the same spot, looking at the visitors, and waiting for orders.
    

      “Varka, run and buy three bottles of beer!”
    

      She starts off, and tries to run as quickly as she can, to drive away
      sleep.
    

      “Varka, fetch some vodka! Varka, where’s the corkscrew? Varka,
      clean a herring!”
    

      But now, at last, the visitors have gone; the lights are put out, the
      master and mistress go to bed.
    

      “Varka, rock the baby!” she hears the last order.
    

      The cricket churrs in the stove; the green patch on the ceiling and the
      shadows from the trousers and the baby-clothes force themselves on Varka’s
      half-opened eyes again, wink at her and cloud her mind.
    

      “Hush-a-bye, my baby wee,” she murmurs, “and I will sing
      a song to thee.”
    

      And the baby screams, and is worn out with screaming. Again Varka sees the
      muddy high road, the people with wallets, her mother Pelageya, her father
      Yefim. She understands everything, she recognises everyone, but through
      her half sleep she cannot understand the force which binds her, hand and
      foot, weighs upon her, and prevents her from living. She looks round,
      searches for that force that she may escape from it, but she cannot find
      it. At last, tired to death, she does her very utmost, strains her eyes,
      looks up at the flickering green patch, and listening to the screaming,
      finds the foe who will not let her live.
    

      That foe is the baby.
    

      She laughs. It seems strange to her that she has failed to grasp such a
      simple thing before. The green patch, the shadows, and the cricket seem to
      laugh and wonder too.
    

      The hallucination takes possession of Varka. She gets up from her stool,
      and with a broad smile on her face and wide unbDlinking eyes, she walks up
      and down the room. She feels pleased and tickled at the thought that she
      will be rid directly of the baby that binds her hand and foot. . . . Kill
      the baby and then sleep, sleep, sleep. . . .
    

      Laughing and winking and shaking her fingers at the green patch, Varka
      steals up to the cradle and bends over the baby. When she has strangled
      him, she quickly lies down on the floor, laughs with delight that she can
      sleep, and in a minute is sleeping as sound as the dead.
    











      CHILDREN
    

PAPA and mamma and
      Aunt Nadya are not at home. They have gone to a christening party at the
      house of that old officer who rides on a little grey horse. While waiting
      for them to come home, Grisha, Anya, Alyosha, Sonya, and the cook’s
      son, Andrey, are sitting at the table in the dining-room, playing at loto.
      To tell the truth, it is bedtime, but how can one go to sleep without
      hearing from mamma what the baby was like at the christening, and what
      they had for supper? The table, lighted by a hanging lamp, is dotted with
      numbers, nutshells, scraps of paper, and little bits of glass. Two cards
      lie in front of each player, and a heap of bits of glass for covering the
      numbers. In the middle of the table is a white saucer with five kopecks in
      it. Beside the saucer, a half-eaten apple, a pair of scissors, and a plate
      on which they have been told to put their nutshells. The children are
      playing for money. The stake is a kopeck. The rule is: if anyone cheats,
      he is turned out at once. There is no one in the dining-room but the
      players, and nurse, Agafya Ivanovna, is in the kitchen, showing the cook
      how to cut a pattern, while their elder brother, Vasya, a schoolboy in the
      fifth class, is lying on the sofa in the drawing-room, feeling bored.
    

      They are playing with zest. The greatest excitement is expressed on the
      face of Grisha. He is a small boy of nine, with a head cropped so that the
      bare skin shows through, chubby cheeks, and thick lips like a negro’s.
      He is already in the preparatory class, and so is regarded as grown up,
      and the cleverest. He is playing entirely for the sake of the money. If
      there had been no kopecks in the saucer, he would have been asleep long
      ago. His brown eyes stray uneasily and jealously over the other players’
      cards. The fear that he may not win, envy, and the financial combinations
      of which his cropped head is full, will not let him sit still and
      concentrate his mind. He fidgets as though he were sitting on thorns. When
      he wins, he snatches up the money greedily, and instantly puts it in his
      pocket. His sister, Anya, a girl of eight, with a sharp chin and clever
      shining eyes, is also afraid that someone else may win. She flushes and
      turns pale, and watches the players keenly. The kopecks do not interest
      her. Success in the game is for her a question of vanity. The other
      sister, Sonya, a child of six with a curly head, and a complexion such as
      is seen only in very healthy children, expensive dolls, and the faces on
      bonbon boxes, is playing loto for the process of the game itself. There is
      bliss all over her face. Whoever wins, she laughs and claps her hands.
      Alyosha, a chubby, spherical little figure, gasps, breathes hard through
      his nose, and stares open-eyed at the cards. He is moved neither by
      covetousness nor vanity. So long as he is not driven out of the room, or
      sent to bed, he is thankful. He looks phlegmatic, but at heart he is
      rather a little beast. He is not there so much for the sake of the loto,
      as for the sake of the misunderstandings which are inevitable in the game.
      He is greatly delighted if one hits another, or calls him names. He ought
      to have run off somewhere long ago, but he won’t leave the table for
      a minute, for fear they should steal his counters or his kopecks. As he
      can only count the units and numbers which end in nought, Anya covers his
      numbers for him. The fifth player, the cook’s son, Andrey, a
      dark-skinned and sickly looking boy in a cotton shirt, with a copper cross
      on his breast, stands motionless, looking dreamily at the numbers. He
      takes no interest in winning, or in the success of the others, because he
      is entirely engrossed by the arithmetic of the game, and its far from
      complex theory; “How many numbers there are in the world,” he
      is thinking, “and how is it they don’t get mixed up?”
    

      They all shout out the numbers in turn, except Sonya and Alyosha. To vary
      the monotony, they have invented in the course of time a number of
      synonyms and comic nicknames. Seven, for instance, is called the “ovenrake,”
      eleven the “sticks,” seventy-seven “Semyon Semyonitch,”
      ninety “grandfather,” and so on. The game is going merrily.
    

      “Thirty-two,” cries Grisha, drawing the little yellow
      cylinders out of his father’s cap. “Seventeen! Ovenrake!
      Twenty-eight! Lay them straight. . . .”
    

      Anya sees that Andrey has let twenty-eight slip. At any other time she
      would have pointed it out to him, but now when her vanity lies in the
      saucer with the kopecks, she is triumphant.
    

      “Twenty-three!” Grisha goes on, “Semyon Semyonitch!
      Nine!”
    

      “A beetle, a beetle,” cries Sonya, pointing to a beetle
      running across the table. “Aie!”
    

      “Don’t kill it,” says Alyosha, in his deep bass, “perhaps
      it’s got children . . . .”
    

      Sonya follows the black beetle with her eyes and wonders about its
      children: what tiny little beetles they must be!
    

      “Forty-three! One!” Grisha goes on, unhappy at the thought
      that Anya has already made two fours. “Six!”
    

      “Game! I have got the game!” cries Sonya, rolling her eyes
      coquettishly and giggling.
    

      The players’ countenances lengthen.
    

      “Must make sure!” says Grisha, looking with hatred at Sonya.
    

      Exercising his rights as a big boy, and the cleverest, Grisha takes upon
      himself to decide. What he wants, that they do. Sonya’s reckoning is
      slowly and carefully verified, and to the great regret of her fellow
      players, it appears that she has not cheated. Another game is begun.
    

      “I did see something yesterday!” says Anya, as though to
      herself. “Filipp Filippitch turned his eyelids inside out somehow
      and his eyes looked red and dreadful, like an evil spirit’s.”
    

      “I saw it too,” says Grisha. “Eight! And a boy at our
      school can move his ears. Twenty-seven!”
    

      Andrey looks up at Grisha, meditates, and says:
    

      “I can move my ears too. . . .”
    

      “Well then, move them.”
    

      Andrey moves his eyes, his lips, and his fingers, and fancies that his
      ears are moving too. Everyone laughs.
    

      “He is a horrid man, that Filipp Filippitch,” sighs Sonya.
      “He came into our nursery yesterday, and I had nothing on but my
      chemise . . . And I felt so improper!”
    

      “Game!” Grisha cries suddenly, snatching the money from the
      saucer. “I’ve got the game! You can look and see if you like.”
    

      The cook’s son looks up and turns pale.
    

      “Then I can’t go on playing any more,” he whispers.
    

      “Why not?”
    

      “Because . . . because I have got no more money.”
    

      “You can’t play without money,” says Grisha.
    

      Andrey ransacks his pockets once more to make sure. Finding nothing in
      them but crumbs and a bitten pencil, he drops the corners of his mouth and
      begins bDlinking miserably. He is on the point of crying. . . .
    

      “I’ll put it down for you!” says Sonya, unable to endure
      his look of agony. “Only mind you must pay me back afterwards.”
    

      The money is brought and the game goes on.
    

      “I believe they are ringing somewhere,” says Anya, opening her
      eyes wide.
    

      They all leave off playing and gaze open-mouthed at the dark window. The
      reflection of the lamp glimmers in the darkness.
    

      “It was your fancy.”
    

      “At night they only ring in the cemetery,” says Andrey.
    

      “And what do they ring there for?”
    

      “To prevent robbers from breaking into the church. They are afraid
      of the bells.”
    

      “And what do robbers break into the church for?” asks Sonya.
    

      “Everyone knows what for: to kill the watchmen.”
    

      A minute passes in silence. They all look at one another, shudder, and go
      on playing. This time Andrey wins.
    

      “He has cheated,” Alyosha booms out, apropos of nothing.
    

      “What a lie, I haven’t cheated.”
    

      Andrey turns pale, his mouth works, and he gives Alyosha a slap on the
      head! Alyosha glares angrily, jumps up, and with one knee on the table,
      slaps Andrey on the cheek! Each gives the other a second blow, and both
      howl. Sonya, feeling such horrors too much for her, begins crying too, and
      the dining-room resounds with lamentations on various notes. But do not
      imagine that that is the end of the game. Before five minutes are over,
      the children are laughing and talking peaceably again. Their faces are
      tear-stained, but that does not prevent them from smiling; Alyosha is
      positively blissful, there has been a squabble!
    

      Vasya, the fifth form schoolboy, walks into the dining-room. He looks
      sleepy and disillusioned.
    

      “This is revolting!” he thinks, seeing Grisha feel in his
      pockets in which the kopecks are jingling. “How can they give
      children money? And how can they let them play games of chance? A nice way
      to bring them up, I must say! It’s revolting!”
    

      But the children’s play is so tempting that he feels an inclination
      to join them and to try his luck.
    

      “Wait a minute and I’ll sit down to a game,” he says.
    

      “Put down a kopeck!”
    

      “In a minute,” he says, fumbling in his pockets. “I
      haven’t a kopeck, but here is a rouble. I’ll stake a rouble.”
    

      “No, no, no. . . . You must put down a kopeck.”
    

      “You stupids. A rouble is worth more than a kopeck anyway,”
      the schoolboy explains. “Whoever wins can give me change.”
    

      “No, please! Go away!”
    

      The fifth form schoolboy shrugs his shoulders, and goes into the kitchen
      to get change from the servants. It appears there is not a single kopeck
      in the kitchen.
    

      “In that case, you give me change,” he urges Grisha, coming
      back from the kitchen. “I’ll pay you for the change. Won’t
      you? Come, give me ten kopecks for a rouble.”
    

      Grisha looks suspiciously at Vasya, wondering whether it isn’t some
      trick, a swindle.
    

      “I won’t,” he says, holding his pockets.
    

      Vasya begins to get cross, and abuses them, calling them idiots and
      blockheads.
    

      “I’ll put down a stake for you, Vasya!” says Sonya.
      “Sit down.” He sits down and lays two cards before him. Anya
      begins counting the numbers.
    

      “I’ve dropped a kopeck!” Grisha announces suddenly, in
      an agitated voice. “Wait!”
    

      He takes the lamp, and creeps under the table to look for the kopeck. They
      clutch at nutshells and all sorts of nastiness, knock their heads
      together, but do not find the kopeck. They begin looking again, and look
      till Vasya takes the lamp out of Grisha’s hands and puts it in its
      place. Grisha goes on looking in the dark. But at last the kopeck is
      found. The players sit down at the table and mean to go on playing.
    

      “Sonya is asleep!” Alyosha announces.
    

      Sonya, with her curly head lying on her arms, is in a sweet, sound,
      tranquil sleep, as though she had been asleep for an hour. She has fallen
      asleep by accident, while the others were looking for the kopeck.
    

      “Come along, lie on mamma’s bed!” says Anya, leading her
      away from the table. “Come along!”
    

      They all troop out with her, and five minutes later mamma’s bed
      presents a curious spectacle. Sonya is asleep. Alyosha is snoring beside
      her. With their heads to the others’ feet, sleep Grisha and Anya.
      The cook’s son, Andrey too, has managed to snuggle in beside them.
      Near them lie the kopecks, that have lost their power till the next game.
      Good-night!
    











      THE RUNAWAY
    

IT had been a long
      business. At first Pashka had walked with his mother in the rain, at one
      time across a mown field, then by forest paths, where the yellow leaves
      stuck to his boots; he had walked until it was daylight. Then he had stood
      for two hours in the dark passage, waiting for the door to open. It was
      not so cold and damp in the passage as in the yard, but with the high wind
      spurts of rain flew in even there. When the passage gradually became
      packed with people Pashka, squeezed among them, leaned his face against
      somebody’s sheepskin which smelt strongly of salt fish, and sank
      into a doze. But at last the bolt clicked, the door flew open, and Pashka
      and his mother went into the waiting-room. All the patients sat on benches
      without stirring or speaking. Pashka looked round at them, and he too was
      silent, though he was seeing a great deal that was strange and funny. Only
      once, when a lad came into the waiting-room hopping on one leg, Pashka
      longed to hop too; he nudged his mother’s elbow, giggled in his
      sleeve, and said: “Look, mammy, a sparrow.”
    

      “Hush, child, hush!” said his mother.
    

      A sleepy-looking hospital assistant appeared at the little window.
    

      “Come and be registered!” he boomed out.
    

      All of them, including the funny lad who hopped, filed up to the window.
      The assistant asked each one his name, and his father’s name, where
      he lived, how long he had been ill, and so on. From his mother’s
      answers, Pashka learned that his name was not Pashka, but Pavel
      Galaktionov, that he was seven years old, that he could not read or write,
      and that he had been ill ever since Easter.
    

      Soon after the registration, he had to stand up for a little while; the
      doctor in a white apron, with a towel round his waist, walked across the
      waiting-room. As he passed by the boy who hopped, he shrugged his
      shoulders, and said in a sing-song tenor:
    

      “Well, you are an idiot! Aren’t you an idiot? I told you to
      come on Monday, and you come on Friday. It’s nothing to me if you
      don’t come at all, but you know, you idiot, your leg will be done
      for!”
    

      The lad made a pitiful face, as though he were going to beg for alms,
      bDlinked, and said:
    

      “Kindly do something for me, Ivan Mikolaitch!”
    

      “It’s no use saying ‘Ivan Mikolaitch,’” the
      doctor mimicked him. “You were told to come on Monday, and you ought
      to obey. You are an idiot, and that is all about it.”
    

      The doctor began seeing the patients. He sat in his little room, and
      called up the patients in turn. Sounds were continually coming from the
      little room, piercing wails, a child’s crying, or the doctor’s
      angry words:
    

      “Come, why are you bawling? Am I murdering you, or what? Sit quiet!”
    

      Pashka’s turn came.
    

      “Pavel Galaktionov!” shouted the doctor.
    

      His mother was aghast, as though she had not expected this summons, and
      taking Pashka by the hand, she led him into the room.
    

      The doctor was sitting at the table, mechanically tapping on a thick book
      with a little hammer.
    

      “What’s wrong?” he asked, without looking at them.
    

      “The little lad has an ulcer on his elbow, sir,” answered his
      mother, and her face assumed an expression as though she really were
      terribly grieved at Pashka’s ulcer.
    

      “Undress him!”
    

      Pashka, panting, unwound the kerchief from his neck, then wiped his nose
      on his sleeve, and began deliberately pulling off his sheepskin.
    

      “Woman, you have not come here on a visit!” said the doctor
      angrily. “Why are you dawdling? You are not the only one here.”
    

      Pashka hurriedly flung the sheepskin on the floor, and with his mother’s
      help took off his shirt. . . The doctor looked at him lazily, and patted
      him on his bare stomach.
    

      “You have grown quite a respectable corporation, brother Pashka,”
      he said, and heaved a sigh. “Come, show me your elbow.”
    

      Pashka looked sideways at the basin full of bloodstained slops, looked at
      the doctor’s apron, and began to cry.
    

      “May-ay!” the doctor mimicked him. “Nearly old enough to
      be married, spoilt boy, and here he is blubbering! For shame!”
    

      Pashka, trying not to cry, looked at his mother, and in that look could be
      read the entreaty: “Don’t tell them at home that I cried at
      the hospital.”
    

      The doctor examined his elbow, pressed it, heaved a sigh, clicked with his
      lips, then pressed it again.
    

      “You ought to be beaten, woman, but there is no one to do it,”
      he said. “Why didn’t you bring him before? Why, the whole arm
      is done for. Look, foolish woman. You see, the joint is diseased!”
    

      “You know best, kind sir . . .” sighed the woman.
    

      “Kind sir. . . . She’s let the boy’s arm rot, and now it
      is ‘kind sir.’ What kind of workman will he be without an arm?
      You’ll be nursing him and looking after him for ages. I bet if you
      had had a pimple on your nose, you’d have run to the hospital quick
      enough, but you have left your boy to rot for six months. You are all like
      that.”
    

      The doctor lighted a cigarette. While the cigarette smoked, he scolded the
      woman, and shook his head in time to the song he was humming inwardly,
      while he thought of something else. Pashka stood naked before him,
      listening and looking at the smoke. When the cigarette went out, the
      doctor started, and said in a lower tone:
    

      “Well, listen, woman. You can do nothing with ointments and drops in
      this case. You must leave him in the hospital.”
    

      “If necessary, sir, why not?
    

      “We must operate on him. You stop with me, Pashka,” said the
      doctor, slapping Pashka on the shoulder. “Let mother go home, and
      you and I will stop here, old man. It’s nice with me, old boy, it’s
      first-rate here. I’ll tell you what we’ll do, Pashka, we will
      go catching finches together. I will show you a fox! We will go visiting
      together! Shall we? And mother will come for you tomorrow! Eh?”
    

      Pashka looked inquiringly at his mother.
    

      “You stay, child!” she said.
    

      “He’ll stay, he’ll stay!” cried the doctor
      gleefully. “And there is no need to discuss it. I’ll show him
      a live fox! We will go to the fair together to buy candy! Marya Denisovna,
      take him upstairs!”
    

      The doctor, apparently a light-hearted and friendly fellow, seemed glad to
      have company; Pashka wanted to oblige him, especially as he had never in
      his life been to a fair, and would have been glad to have a look at a live
      fox, but how could he do without his mother?
    

      After a little reflection he decided to ask the doctor to let his mother
      stay in the hospital too, but before he had time to open his mouth the
      lady assistant was already taking him upstairs. He walked up and looked
      about him with his mouth open. The staircase, the floors, and the
      doorposts—everything huge, straight, and bright-were painted a
      splendid yellow colour, and had a delicious smell of Lenten oil. On all
      sides lamps were hanging, strips of carpet stretched along the floor,
      copper taps stuck out on the walls. But best of all Pashka liked the
      bedstead upon which he was made to sit down, and the grey woollen
      coverlet. He touched the pillows and the coverlet with his hands, looked
      round the ward, and made up his mind that it was very nice at the doctor’s.
    

      The ward was not a large one, it consisted of only three beds. One bed
      stood empty, the second was occupied by Pashka, and on the third sat an
      old man with sour eyes, who kept coughing and spitting into a mug. From
      Pashka’s bed part of another ward could be seen with two beds; on
      one a very pale wasted-looking man with an india-rubber bottle on his head
      was asleep; on the other a peasant with his head tied up, looking very
      like a woman, was sitting with his arms spread out.
    

      After making Pashka sit down, the assistant went out and came back a
      little later with a bundle of clothes under her arm.
    

      “These are for you,” she said, “put them on.”
    

      Pashka undressed and, not without satisfaction began attiring himself in
      his new array. When he had put on the shirt, the drawers, and the little
      grey dressing-gown, he looked at himself complacently, and thought that it
      would not be bad to walk through the village in that costume. His
      imagination pictured his mother’s sending him to the kitchen garden
      by the river to gather cabbage leaves for the little pig; he saw himself
      walking along, while the boys and girls surrounded him and looked with
      envy at his little dressing-gown.
    

      A nurse came into the ward, bringing two tin bowls, two spoons, and two
      pieces of bread. One bowl she set before the old man, the other before
      Pashka.
    

      “Eat!” she said.
    

      Looking into his bowl, Pashka saw some rich cabbage soup, and in the soup
      a piece of meat, and thought again that it was very nice at the doctor’s,
      and that the doctor was not nearly so cross as he had seemed at first. He
      spent a long time swallowing the soup, licking the spoon after each
      mouthful, then when there was nothing left in the bowl but the meat he
      stole a look at the old man, and felt envious that he was still eating the
      soup. With a sigh Pashka attacked the meat, trying to make it last as long
      as possible, but his efforts were fruitless; the meat, too, quickly
      vanished. There was nothing left but the piece of bread. Plain bread
      without anything on it was not appetising, but there was no help for it.
      Pashka thought a little, and ate the bread. At that moment the nurse came
      in with another bowl. This time there was roast meat with potatoes in the
      bowl.
    

      “And where is the bread?” asked the nurse.
    

      Instead of answering, Pashka puffed out his cheeks, and blew out the air.
    

      “Why did you gobble it all up?” said the nurse reproachfully.
      “What are you going to eat your meat with?”
    

      She went and fetched another piece of bread. Pashka had never eaten roast
      meat in his life, and trying it now found it very nice. It vanished
      quickly, and then he had a piece of bread left bigger than the first. When
      the old man had finished his dinner, he put away the remains of his bread
      in a little table. Pashka meant to do the same, but on second thoughts ate
      his piece.
    

      When he had finished he went for a walk. In the next ward, besides the two
      he had seen from the door, there were four other people. Of these only one
      drew his attention. This was a tall, extremely emaciated peasant with a
      morose-looking, hairy face. He was sitting on the bed, nodding his head
      and swinging his right arm all the time like a pendulum. Pashka could not
      take his eyes off him for a long time. At first the man’s regular
      pendulum-like movements seemed to him curious, and he thought they were
      done for the general amusement, but when he looked into the man’s
      face he felt frightened, and realised that he was terribly ill. Going into
      a third ward he saw two peasants with dark red faces as though they were
      smeared with clay. They were sitting motionless on their beds, and with
      their strange faces, in which it was hard to distinguish their features,
      they looked like heathen idols.
    

      “Auntie, why do they look like that?” Pashka asked the nurse.
    

      “They have got smallpox, little lad.”
    

      Going back to his own ward, Pashka sat down on his bed and began waiting
      for the doctor to come and take him to catch finches, or to go to the
      fair. But the doctor did not come. He got a passing glimpse of a hospital
      assistant at the door of the next ward. He bent over the patient on whose
      head lay a bag of ice, and cried: “Mihailo!”
    

      But the sleeping man did not stir. The assistant made a gesture and went
      away. Pashka scrutinised the old man, his next neighbour. The old man
      coughed without ceasing and spat into a mug. His cough had a
      long-drawn-out, creaking sound.
    

      Pashka liked one peculiarity about him; when he drew the air in as he
      coughed, something in his chest whistled and sang on different notes.
    

      “Grandfather, what is it whistles in you?” Pashka asked.
    

      The old man made no answer. Pashka waited a little and asked:
    

      “Grandfather, where is the fox?”
    

      “What fox?”
    

      “The live one.”
    

      “Where should it be? In the forest!”
    

      A long time passed, but the doctor still did not appear. The nurse brought
      in tea, and scolded Pashka for not having saved any bread for his tea; the
      assistant came once more and set to work to wake Mihailo. It turned blue
      outside the windows, the wards were lighted up, but the doctor did not
      appear. It was too late now to go to the fair and catch finches; Pashka
      stretched himself on his bed and began thinking. He remembered the candy
      promised him by the doctor, the face and voice of his mother, the darkness
      in his hut at home, the stove, peevish granny Yegorovna . . . and he
      suddenly felt sad and dreary. He remembered that his mother was coming for
      him next day, smiled, and shut his eyes.
    

      He was awakened by a rustling. In the next ward someone was stepping about
      and speaking in a whisper. Three figures were moving about Mihailo’s
      bed in the dim light of the night-light and the ikon lamp.
    

      “Shall we take him, bed and all, or without?” asked one of
      them.
    

      “Without. You won’t get through the door with the bed.”
    

      “He’s died at the wrong time, the Kingdom of Heaven be his!”
    

      One took Mihailo by his shoulders, another by his legs and lifted him up:
      Mihailo’s arms and the skirt of his dressing-gown hung limply to the
      ground. A third—it was the peasant who looked like a woman—crossed
      himself, and all three tramping clumsily with their feet and stepping on
      Mihailo’s skirts, went out of the ward.
    

      There came the whistle and humming on different notes from the chest of
      the old man who was asleep. Pashka listened, peeped at the dark windows,
      and jumped out of bed in terror.
    

      “Ma-a-mka!” he moaned in a deep bass.
    

      And without waiting for an answer, he rushed into the next ward. There the
      darkness was dimly lighted up by a night-light and the ikon lamp; the
      patients, upset by the death of Mihailo, were sitting on their bedsteads:
      their dishevelled figures, mixed up with the shadows, looked broader,
      taller, and seemed to be growing bigger and bigger; on the furthest
      bedstead in the corner, where it was darkest, there sat the peasant moving
      his head and his hand.
    

      Pashka, without noticing the doors, rushed into the smallpox ward, from
      there into the corridor, from the corridor he flew into a big room where
      monsters, with long hair and the faces of old women, were lying and
      sitting on the beds. Running through the women’s wing he found
      himself again in the corridor, saw the banisters of the staircase he knew
      already, and ran downstairs. There he recognised the waiting-room in which
      he had sat that morning, and began looking for the door into the open air.
    

      The latch creaked, there was a whiff of cold wind, and Pashka, stumbling,
      ran out into the yard. He had only one thought—to run, to run! He
      did not know the way, but felt convinced that if he ran he would be sure
      to find himself at home with his mother. The sky was overcast, but there
      was a moon behind the clouds. Pashka ran from the steps straight forward,
      went round the barn and stumbled into some thick bushes; after stopping
      for a minute and thinking, he dashed back again to the hospital, ran round
      it, and stopped again undecided; behind the hospital there were white
      crosses.
    

      “Ma-a-mka!” he cried, and dashed back.
    

      Running by the dark sinister buildings, he saw one lighted window.
    

      The bright red patch looked dreadful in the darkness, but Pashka, frantic
      with terror, not knowing where to run, turned towards it. Beside the
      window was a porch with steps, and a front door with a white board on it;
      Pashka ran up the steps, looked in at the window, and was at once
      possessed by intense overwhelming joy. Through the window he saw the merry
      affable doctor sitting at the table reading a book. Laughing with
      happiness, Pashka stretched out his hands to the person he knew and tried
      to call out, but some unseen force choked him and struck at his legs; he
      staggered and fell down on the steps unconscious.
    

      When he came to himself it was daylight, and a voice he knew very well,
      that had promised him a fair, finches, and a fox, was saying beside him:
    

      “Well, you are an idiot, Pashka! Aren’t you an idiot? You
      ought to be beaten, but there’s no one to do it.”
    











      GRISHA
    

GRISHA, a chubby
      little boy, born two years and eight months ago, is walking on the
      boulevard with his nurse. He is wearing a long, wadded pelisse, a scarf, a
      big cap with a fluffy pom-pom, and warm over-boots. He feels hot and
      stifled, and now, too, the rollicking April sunshine is beating straight
      in his face, and making his eyelids tingle.
    

      The whole of his clumsy, timidly and uncertainly stepping little figure
      expresses the utmost bewilderment.
    

      Hitherto Grisha has known only a rectangular world, where in one corner
      stands his bed, in the other nurse’s trunk, in the third a chair,
      while in the fourth there is a little lamp burning. If one looks under the
      bed, one sees a doll with a broken arm and a drum; and behind nurse’s
      trunk, there are a great many things of all sorts: cotton reels, boxes
      without lids, and a broken Jack-a-dandy. In that world, besides nurse and
      Grisha, there are often mamma and the cat. Mamma is like a doll, and puss
      is like papa’s fur-coat, only the coat hasn’t got eyes and a
      tail. From the world which is called the nursery a door leads to a great
      expanse where they have dinner and tea. There stands Grisha’s chair
      on high legs, and on the wall hangs a clock which exists to swing its
      pendulum and chime. From the dining-room, one can go into a room where
      there are red arm-chairs. Here, there is a dark patch on the carpet,
      concerning which fingers are still shaken at Grisha. Beyond that room is
      still another, to which one is not admitted, and where one sees glimpses
      of papa—an extremely enigmatical person! Nurse and mamma are
      comprehensible: they dress Grisha, feed him, and put him to bed, but what
      papa exists for is unknown. There is another enigmatical person, auntie,
      who presented Grisha with a drum. She appears and disappears. Where does
      she disappear to? Grisha has more than once looked under the bed, behind
      the trunk, and under the sofa, but she was not there.
    

      In this new world, where the sun hurts one’s eyes, there are so many
      papas and mammas and aunties, that there is no knowing to whom to run. But
      what is stranger and more absurd than anything is the horses. Grisha gazes
      at their moving legs, and can make nothing of it. He looks at his nurse
      for her to solve the mystery, but she does not speak.
    

      All at once he hears a fearful tramping. . . . A crowd of soldiers, with
      red faces and bath brooms under their arms, move in step along the
      boulevard straight upon him. Grisha turns cold all over with terror, and
      looks inquiringly at nurse to know whether it is dangerous. But nurse
      neither weeps nor runs away, so there is no danger. Grisha looks after the
      soldiers, and begins to move his feet in step with them himself.
    

      Two big cats with long faces run after each other across the boulevard,
      with their tongues out, and their tails in the air. Grisha thinks that he
      must run too, and runs after the cats.
    

      “Stop!” cries nurse, seizing him roughly by the shoulder.
      “Where are you off to? Haven’t you been told not to be
      naughty?”
    

      Here there is a nurse sitting holding a tray of oranges. Grisha passes by
      her, and, without saying anything, takes an orange.
    

      “What are you doing that for?” cries the companion of his
      travels, slapping his hand and snatching away the orange. “Silly!”
    

      Now Grisha would have liked to pick up a bit of glass that was lying at
      his feet and gleaming like a lamp, but he is afraid that his hand will be
      slapped again.
    

      “My respects to you!” Grisha hears suddenly, almost above his
      ear, a loud thick voice, and he sees a tall man with bright buttons.
    

      To his great delight, this man gives nurse his hand, stops, and begins
      talking to her. The brightness of the sun, the noise of the carriages, the
      horses, the bright buttons are all so impressively new and not dreadful,
      that Grisha’s soul is filled with a feeling of enjoyment and he
      begins to laugh.
    

      “Come along! Come along!” he cries to the man with the bright
      buttons, tugging at his coattails.
    

      “Come along where?” asks the man.
    

      “Come along!” Grisha insists.
    

      He wants to say that it would be just as well to take with them papa,
      mamma, and the cat, but his tongue does not say what he wants to.
    

      A little later, nurse turns out of the boulevard, and leads Grisha into a
      big courtyard where there is still snow; and the man with the bright
      buttons comes with them too. They carefully avoid the lumps of snow and
      the puddles, then, by a dark and dirty staircase, they go into a room.
      Here there is a great deal of smoke, there is a smell of roast meat, and a
      woman is standing by the stove frying cutlets. The cook and the nurse kiss
      each other, and sit down on the bench together with the man, and begin
      talking in a low voice. Grisha, wrapped up as he is, feels insufferably
      hot and stifled.
    

      “Why is this?” he wonders, looking about him.
    

      He sees the dark ceiling, the oven fork with two horns, the stove which
      looks like a great black hole.
    

      “Mam-ma,” he drawls.
    

      “Come, come, come!” cries the nurse. “Wait a bit!”
    

      The cook puts a bottle on the table, two wine-glasses, and a pie. The two
      women and the man with the bright buttons cDlink glasses and empty them
      several times, and, the man puts his arm round first the cook and then the
      nurse. And then all three begin singing in an undertone.
    

      Grisha stretches out his hand towards the pie, and they give him a piece
      of it. He eats it and watches nurse drinking. . . . He wants to drink too.
    

      “Give me some, nurse!” he begs.
    

      The cook gives him a sip out of her glass. He rolls his eyes, bDlinks,
      coughs, and waves his hands for a long time afterwards, while the cook
      looks at him and laughs.
    

      When he gets home Grisha begins to tell mamma, the walls, and the bed
      where he has been, and what he has seen. He talks not so much with his
      tongue, as with his face and his hands. He shows how the sun shines, how
      the horses run, how the terrible stove looks, and how the cook drinks. . .
      .
    

      In the evening he cannot get to sleep. The soldiers with the brooms, the
      big cats, the horses, the bit of glass, the tray of oranges, the bright
      buttons, all gathered together, weigh on his brain. He tosses from side to
      side, babbles, and, at last, unable to endure his excitement, begins
      crying.
    

      “You are feverish,” says mamma, putting her open hand on his
      forehead. “What can have caused it?
    

      “Stove!” wails Grisha. “Go away, stove!”
    

      “He must have eaten too much . . .” mamma decides.
    

      And Grisha, shattered by the impressions of the new life he has just
      experienced, receives a spoonful of castor-oil from mamma.
    











      OYSTERS
    

I NEED no great
      effort of memory to recall, in every detail, the rainy autumn evening when
      I stood with my father in one of the more frequented streets of Moscow,
      and felt that I was gradually being overcome by a strange illness. I had
      no pain at all, but my legs were giving way under me, the words stuck in
      my throat, my head slipped weakly on one side . . . It seemed as though,
      in a moment, I must fall down and lose consciousness.
    

      If I had been taken into a hospital at that minute, the doctors would have
      had to write over my bed: Fames, a disease which is not in the
      manuals of medicine.
    

      Beside me on the pavement stood my father in a shabby summer overcoat and
      a serge cap, from which a bit of white wadding was sticking out. On his
      feet he had big heavy goloshes. Afraid, vain man, that people would see
      that his feet were bare under his goloshes, he had drawn the tops of some
      old boots up round the calves of his legs.
    

      This poor, foolish, queer creature, whom I loved the more warmly the more
      ragged and dirty his smart summer overcoat became, had come to Moscow,
      five months before, to look for a job as copying-clerk. For those five
      months he had been trudging about Moscow looking for work, and it was only
      on that day that he had brought himself to go into the street to beg for
      alms.
    

      Before us was a big house of three storeys, adorned with a blue signboard
      with the word “Restaurant” on it. My head was drooping feebly
      backwards and on one side, and I could not help looking upwards at the
      lighted windows of the restaurant. Human figures were flitting about at
      the windows. I could see the right side of the orchestrion, two
      oleographs, hanging lamps . . . . Staring into one window, I saw a patch
      of white. The patch was motionless, and its rectangular outlines stood out
      sharply against the dark, brown background. I looked intently and made out
      of the patch a white placard on the wall. Something was written on it, but
      what it was, I could not see. . .
    

      For half an hour I kept my eyes on the placard. Its white attracted my
      eyes, and, as it were, hypnotised my brain. I tried to read it, but my
      efforts were in vain.
    

      At last the strange disease got the upper hand.
    

      The rumble of the carriages began to seem like thunder, in the stench of
      the street I distinguished a thousand smells. The restaurant lights and
      the lamps dazzled my eyes like lightning. My five senses were overstrained
      and sensitive beyond the normal. I began to see what I had not seen
      before.
    

      “Oysters . . .” I made out on the placard.
    

      A strange word! I had lived in the world eight years and three months, but
      had never come across that word. What did it mean? Surely it was not the
      name of the restaurant-keeper? But signboards with names on them always
      hang outside, not on the walls indoors!
    

      “Papa, what does ‘oysters’ mean?” I asked in a
      husky voice, making an effort to turn my face towards my father.
    

      My father did not hear. He was keeping a watch on the movements of the
      crowd, and following every passer-by with his eyes. . . . From his eyes I
      saw that he wanted to say something to the passers-by, but the fatal word
      hung like a heavy weight on his trembling lips and could not be flung off.
      He even took a step after one passer-by and touched him on the sleeve, but
      when he turned round, he said, “I beg your pardon,” was
      overcome with confusion, and staggered back.
    

      “Papa, what does ‘oysters’ mean?” I repeated.
    

      “It is an animal . . . that lives in the sea.”
    

      I instantly pictured to myself this unknown marine animal. . . . I thought
      it must be something midway between a fish and a crab. As it was from the
      sea they made of it, of course, a very nice hot fish soup with savoury
      pepper and laurel leaves, or broth with vinegar and fricassee of fish and
      cabbage, or crayfish sauce, or served it cold with horse-radish. . . . I
      vividly imagined it being brought from the market, quickly cleaned,
      quickly put in the pot, quickly, quickly, for everyone was hungry . . .
      awfully hungry! From the kitchen rose the smell of hot fish and crayfish
      soup.
    

      I felt that this smell was tickling my palate and nostrils, that it was
      gradually taking possession of my whole body. . . . The restaurant, my
      father, the white placard, my sleeves were all smelling of it, smelling so
      strongly that I began to chew. I moved my jaws and swallowed as though I
      really had a piece of this marine animal in my mouth . . .
    

      My legs gave way from the blissful sensation I was feeling, and I clutched
      at my father’s arm to keep myself from falling, and leant against
      his wet summer overcoat. My father was trembling and shivering. He was
      cold . . .
    

      “Papa, are oysters a Lenten dish?” I asked.
    

      “They are eaten alive . . .” said my father. “They are
      in shells like tortoises, but . . . in two halves.”
    

      The delicious smell instantly left off affecting me, and the illusion
      vanished. . . . Now I understood it all!
    

      “How nasty,” I whispered, “how nasty!”
    

      So that’s what “oysters” meant! I imagined to myself a
      creature like a frog. A frog sitting in a shell, peeping out from it with
      big, glittering eyes, and moving its revolting jaws. I imagined this
      creature in a shell with claws, glittering eyes, and a slimy skin, being
      brought from the market. . . . The children would all hide while the cook,
      frowning with an air of disgust, would take the creature by its claw, put
      it on a plate, and carry it into the dining-room. The grown-ups would take
      it and eat it, eat it alive with its eyes, its teeth, its legs! While it
      squeaked and tried to bite their lips. . . .
    

      I frowned, but . . . but why did my teeth move as though I were munching?
      The creature was loathsome, disgusting, terrible, but I ate it, ate it
      greedily, afraid of distinguishing its taste or smell. As soon as I had
      eaten one, I saw the glittering eyes of a second, a third . . . I ate them
      too. . . . At last I ate the table-napkin, the plate, my father’s
      goloshes, the white placard . . . I ate everything that caught my eye,
      because I felt that nothing but eating would take away my illness. The
      oysters had a terrible look in their eyes and were loathsome. I shuddered
      at the thought of them, but I wanted to eat! To eat!
    

      “Oysters! Give me some oysters!” was the cry that broke from
      me and I stretched out my hand.
    

      “Help us, gentlemen!” I heard at that moment my father say, in
      a hollow and shaking voice. “I am ashamed to ask but—my God!—I
      can bear no more!”
    

      “Oysters!” I cried, pulling my father by the skirts of his
      coat.
    

      “Do you mean to say you eat oysters? A little chap like you!”
      I heard laughter close to me.
    

      Two gentlemen in top hats were standing before us, looking into my face
      and laughing.
    

      “Do you really eat oysters, youngster? That’s interesting! How
      do you eat them?”
    

      I remember that a strong hand dragged me into the lighted restaurant. A
      minute later there was a crowd round me, watching me with curiosity and
      amusement. I sat at a table and ate something slimy, salt with a flavour
      of dampness and mouldiness. I ate greedily without chewing, without
      looking and trying to discover what I was eating. I fancied that if I
      opened my eyes I should see glittering eyes, claws, and sharp teeth.
    

      All at once I began biting something hard, there was a sound of a
      scrunching.
    

      “Ha, ha! He is eating the shells,” laughed the crowd. “Little
      silly, do you suppose you can eat that?”
    

      After that I remember a terrible thirst. I was lying in my bed, and could
      not sleep for heartburn and the strange taste in my parched mouth. My
      father was walking up and down, gesticulating with his hands.
    

      “I believe I have caught cold,” he was muttering. “I’ve
      a feeling in my head as though someone were sitting on it. . . . Perhaps
      it is because I have not . . . er . . . eaten anything to-day. . . . I
      really am a queer, stupid creature. . . . I saw those gentlemen pay ten
      roubles for the oysters. Why didn’t I go up to them and ask them . .
      . to lend me something? They would have given something.”
    

      Towards morning, I fell asleep and dreamt of a frog sitting in a shell,
      moving its eyes. At midday I was awakened by thirst, and looked for my
      father: he was still walking up and down and gesticulating.
    











      HOME
    

“SOMEONE came
      from the Grigoryevs’ to fetch a book, but I said you were not at
      home. The postman brought the newspaper and two letters. By the way,
      Yevgeny Petrovitch, I should like to ask you to speak to Seryozha. To-day,
      and the day before yesterday, I have noticed that he is smoking. When I
      began to expostulate with him, he put his fingers in his ears as usual,
      and sang loudly to drown my voice.”
    

      Yevgeny Petrovitch Bykovsky, the prosecutor of the circuit court, who had
      just come back from a session and was taking off his gloves in his study,
      looked at the governess as she made her report, and laughed.
    

      “Seryozha smoking . . .” he said, shrugging his shoulders.
      “I can picture the little cherub with a cigarette in his mouth! Why,
      how old is he?”
    

      “Seven. You think it is not important, but at his age smoking is a
      bad and pernicious habit, and bad habits ought to be eradicated in the
      beginning.”
    

      “Perfectly true. And where does he get the tobacco?”
    

      “He takes it from the drawer in your table.”
    

      “Yes? In that case, send him to me.”
    

      When the governess had gone out, Bykovsky sat down in an arm-chair before
      his writing-table, shut his eyes, and fell to thinking. He pictured his
      Seryozha with a huge cigar, a yard long, in the midst of clouds of tobacco
      smoke, and this caricature made him smile; at the same time, the grave,
      troubled face of the governess called up memories of the long past,
      half-forgotten time when smoking aroused in his teachers and parents a
      strange, not quite intelligible horror. It really was horror. Children
      were mercilessly flogged and expelled from school, and their lives were
      made a misery on account of smoking, though not a single teacher or father
      knew exactly what was the harm or sinfulness of smoking. Even very
      intelligent people did not scruple to wage war on a vice which they did
      not understand. Yevgeny Petrovitch remembered the head-master of the high
      school, a very cultured and good-natured old man, who was so appalled when
      he found a high-school boy with a cigarette in his mouth that he turned
      pale, immediately summoned an emergency committee of the teachers, and
      sentenced the sinner to expulsion. This was probably a law of social life:
      the less an evil was understood, the more fiercely and coarsely it was
      attacked.
    

      The prosecutor remembered two or three boys who had been expelled and
      their subsequent life, and could not help thinking that very often the
      punishment did a great deal more harm than the crime itself. The living
      organism has the power of rapidly adapting itself, growing accustomed and
      inured to any atmosphere whatever, otherwise man would be bound to feel at
      every moment what an irrational basis there often is underlying his
      rational activity, and how little of established truth and certainty there
      is even in work so responsible and so terrible in its effects as that of
      the teacher, of the lawyer, of the writer. . . .
    

      And such light and discursive thoughts as visit the brain only when it is
      weary and resting began straying through Yevgeny Petrovitch’s head;
      there is no telling whence and why they come, they do not remain long in
      the mind, but seem to glide over its surface without sinking deeply into
      it. For people who are forced for whole hours, and even days, to think by
      routine in one direction, such free private thinking affords a kind of
      comfort, an agreeable solace.
    

      It was between eight and nine o’clock in the evening. Overhead, on
      the second storey, someone was walking up and down, and on the floor above
      that four hands were playing scales. The pacing of the man overhead who,
      to judge from his nervous step, was thinking of something harassing, or
      was suffering from toothache, and the monotonous scales gave the stillness
      of the evening a drowsiness that disposed to lazy reveries. In the
      nursery, two rooms away, the governess and Seryozha were talking.
    

      “Pa-pa has come!” carolled the child. “Papa has co-ome.
      Pa! Pa! Pa!”
    

      “Votre pÃ¨re vous appelle, allez vite!” cried the
      governess, shrill as a frightened bird. “I am speaking to you!”
    

      “What am I to say to him, though?” Yevgeny Petrovitch
      wondered.
    

      But before he had time to think of anything whatever his son Seryozha, a
      boy of seven, walked into the study.
    

      He was a child whose sex could only have been guessed from his dress:
      weakly, white-faced, and fragile. He was limp like a hot-house plant, and
      everything about him seemed extraordinarily soft and tender: his
      movements, his curly hair, the look in his eyes, his velvet jacket.
    

      “Good evening, papa!” he said, in a soft voice, clambering on
      to his father’s knee and giving him a rapid kiss on his neck.
      “Did you send for me?”
    

      “Excuse me, Sergey Yevgenitch,” answered the prosecutor,
      removing him from his knee. “Before kissing we must have a talk, and
      a serious talk . . . I am angry with you, and don’t love you any
      more. I tell you, my boy, I don’t love you, and you are no son of
      mine. . . .”
    

      Seryozha looked intently at his father, then shifted his eyes to the
      table, and shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “What have I done to you?” he asked in perplexity, bDlinking.
      “I haven’t been in your study all day, and I haven’t
      touched anything.”
    

      “Natalya Semyonovna has just been complaining to me that you have
      been smoking. . . . Is it true? Have you been smoking?”
    

      “Yes, I did smoke once. . . . That’s true. . . .”
    

      “Now you see you are lying as well,” said the prosecutor,
      frowning to disguise a smile. “Natalya Semyonovna has seen you
      smoking twice. So you see you have been detected in three misdeeds:
      smoking, taking someone else’s tobacco, and lying. Three faults.”
    

      “Oh yes,” Seryozha recollected, and his eyes smiled. “That’s
      true, that’s true; I smoked twice: to-day and before.”
    

      “So you see it was not once, but twice. . . . I am very, very much
      displeased with you! You used to be a good boy, but now I see you are
      spoilt and have become a bad one.”
    

      Yevgeny Petrovitch smoothed down Seryozha’s collar and thought:
    

      “What more am I to say to him!”
    

      “Yes, it’s not right,” he continued. “I did not
      expect it of you. In the first place, you ought not to take tobacco that
      does not belong to you. Every person has only the right to make use of his
      own property; if he takes anyone else’s . . . he is a bad man!”
      (“I am not saying the right thing!” thought Yevgeny
      Petrovitch.) “For instance, Natalya Semyonovna has a box with her
      clothes in it. That’s her box, and we—that is, you and I—dare
      not touch it, as it is not ours. That’s right, isn’t it? You’ve
      got toy horses and pictures. . . . I don’t take them, do I? Perhaps
      I might like to take them, but . . . they are not mine, but yours!”
    

      “Take them if you like!” said Seryozha, raising his eyebrows.
      “Please don’t hesitate, papa, take them! That yellow dog on
      your table is mine, but I don’t mind. . . . Let it stay.”
    

      “You don’t understand me,” said Bykovsky. “You
      have given me the dog, it is mine now and I can do what I like with it;
      but I didn’t give you the tobacco! The tobacco is mine.” (“I
      am not explaining properly!” thought the prosecutor. “It’s
      wrong! Quite wrong!”) “If I want to smoke someone else’s
      tobacco, I must first of all ask his permission. . . .”
    

      Languidly Dlinking one phrase on to another and imitating the language of
      the nursery, Bykovsky tried to explain to his son the meaning of property.
      Seryozha gazed at his chest and listened attentively (he liked talking to
      his father in the evening), then he leaned his elbow on the edge of the
      table and began screwing up his short-sighted eyes at the papers and the
      inkstand. His eyes strayed over the table and rested on the gum-bottle.
    

      “Papa, what is gum made of?” he asked suddenly, putting the
      bottle to his eyes.
    

      Bykovsky took the bottle out of his hands and set it in its place and went
      on:
    

      “Secondly, you smoke. . . . That’s very bad. Though I smoke it
      does not follow that you may. I smoke and know that it is stupid, I blame
      myself and don’t like myself for it.” (“A clever
      teacher, I am!” he thought.) “Tobacco is very bad for the
      health, and anyone who smokes dies earlier than he should. It’s
      particularly bad for boys like you to smoke. Your chest is weak, you haven’t
      reached your full strength yet, and smoking leads to consumption and other
      illness in weak people. Uncle Ignat died of consumption, you know. If he
      hadn’t smoked, perhaps he would have lived till now.”
    

      Seryozha looked pensively at the lamp, touched the lamp-shade with his
      finger, and heaved a sigh.
    

      “Uncle Ignat played the violin splendidly!” he said. “His
      violin is at the Grigoryevs’ now.”
    

      Seryozha leaned his elbows on the edge of the table again, and sank into
      thought. His white face wore a fixed expression, as though he were
      listening or following a train of thought of his own; distress and
      something like fear came into his big staring eyes. He was most likely
      thinking now of death, which had so lately carried off his mother and
      Uncle Ignat. Death carries mothers and uncles off to the other world,
      while their children and violins remain upon the earth. The dead live
      somewhere in the sky beside the stars, and look down from there upon the
      earth. Can they endure the parting?
    

      “What am I to say to him?” thought Yevgeny Petrovitch. “He’s
      not listening to me. Obviously he does not regard either his misdoings or
      my arguments as serious. How am I to drive it home?”
    

      The prosecutor got up and walked about the study.
    

      “Formerly, in my time, these questions were very simply settled,”
      he reflected. “Every urchin who was caught smoking was thrashed. The
      cowardly and faint-hearted did actually give up smoking, any who were
      somewhat more plucky and intelligent, after the thrashing took to carrying
      tobacco in the legs of their boots, and smoking in the barn. When they
      were caught in the barn and thrashed again, they would go away to smoke by
      the river . . . and so on, till the boy grew up. My mother used to give me
      money and sweets not to smoke. Now that method is looked upon as worthless
      and immoral. The modern teacher, taking his stand on logic, tries to make
      the child form good principles, not from fear, nor from desire for
      distinction or reward, but consciously.”
    

      While he was walking about, thinking, Seryozha climbed up with his legs on
      a chair sideways to the table, and began drawing. That he might not spoil
      official paper nor touch the ink, a heap of half-sheets, cut on purpose
      for him, lay on the table together with a blue pencil.
    

      “Cook was chopping up cabbage to-day and she cut her finger,”
      he said, drawing a little house and moving his eyebrows. “She gave
      such a scream that we were all frightened and ran into the kitchen. Stupid
      thing! Natalya Semyonovna told her to dip her finger in cold water, but
      she sucked it . . . And how could she put a dirty finger in her mouth!
      That’s not proper, you know, papa!”
    

      Then he went on to describe how, while they were having dinner, a man with
      a hurdy-gurdy had come into the yard with a little girl, who had danced
      and sung to the music.
    

      “He has his own train of thought!” thought the prosecutor.
      “He has a little world of his own in his head, and he has his own
      ideas of what is important and unimportant. To gain possession of his
      attention, it’s not enough to imitate his language, one must also be
      able to think in the way he does. He would understand me perfectly if I
      really were sorry for the loss of the tobacco, if I felt injured and
      cried. . . . That’s why no one can take the place of a mother in
      bringing up a child, because she can feel, cry, and laugh together with
      the child. One can do nothing by logic and morality. What more shall I say
      to him? What?”
    

      And it struck Yevgeny Petrovitch as strange and absurd that he, an
      experienced advocate, who spent half his life in the practice of reducing
      people to silence, forestalling what they had to say, and punishing them,
      was completely at a loss and did not know what to say to the boy.
    

      “I say, give me your word of honour that you won’t smoke
      again,” he said.
    

      “Word of hon-nour!” carolled Seryozha, pressing hard on the
      pencil and bending over the drawing. “Word of hon-nour!”
    

      “Does he know what is meant by word of honour?” Bykovsky asked
      himself. “No, I am a poor teacher of morality! If some schoolmaster
      or one of our legal fellows could peep into my brain at this moment he
      would call me a poor stick, and would very likely suspect me of
      unnecessary subtlety. . . . But in school and in court, of course, all
      these wretched questions are far more simply settled than at home; here
      one has to do with people whom one loves beyond everything, and love is
      exacting and complicates the question. If this boy were not my son, but my
      pupil, or a prisoner on his trial, I should not be so cowardly, and my
      thoughts would not be racing all over the place!”
    

      Yevgeny Petrovitch sat down to the table and pulled one of Seryozha’s
      drawings to him. In it there was a house with a crooked roof, and smoke
      which came out of the chimney like a flash of lightning in zigzags up to
      the very edge of the paper; beside the house stood a soldier with dots for
      eyes and a bayonet that looked like the figure 4.
    

      “A man can’t be taller than a house,” said the
      prosecutor.
    

      Seryozha got on his knee, and moved about for some time to get comfortably
      settled there.
    

      “No, papa!” he said, looking at his drawing. “If you
      were to draw the soldier small you would not see his eyes.”
    

      Ought he to argue with him? From daily observation of his son the
      prosecutor had become convinced that children, like savages, have their
      own artistic standpoints and requirements peculiar to them, beyond the
      grasp of grown-up people. Had he been attentively observed, Seryozha might
      have struck a grown-up person as abnormal. He thought it possible and
      reasonable to draw men taller than houses, and to represent in pencil, not
      only objects, but even his sensations. Thus he would depict the sounds of
      an orchestra in the form of smoke like spherical blurs, a whistle in the
      form of a spiral thread. . . . To his mind sound was closely connected
      with form and colour, so that when he painted letters he invariably
      painted the letter L yellow, M red, A black, and so on.
    

      Abandoning his drawing, Seryozha shifted about once more, got into a
      comfortable attitude, and busied himself with his father’s beard.
      First he carefully smoothed it, then he parted it and began combing it
      into the shape of whiskers.
    

      “Now you are like Ivan Stepanovitch,” he said, “and in a
      minute you will be like our porter. Papa, why is it porters stand by
      doors? Is it to prevent thieves getting in?”
    

      The prosecutor felt the child’s breathing on his face, he was
      continually touching his hair with his cheek, and there was a warm soft
      feeling in his soul, as soft as though not only his hands but his whole
      soul were lying on the velvet of Seryozha’s jacket.
    

      He looked at the boy’s big dark eyes, and it seemed to him as though
      from those wide pupils there looked out at him his mother and his wife and
      everything that he had ever loved.
    

      “To think of thrashing him . . .” he mused. “A nice task
      to devise a punishment for him! How can we undertake to bring up the
      young? In old days people were simpler and thought less, and so settled
      problems boldly. But we think too much, we are eaten up by logic . . . .
      The more developed a man is, the more he reflects and gives himself up to
      subtleties, the more undecided and scrupulous he becomes, and the more
      timidity he shows in taking action. How much courage and self-confidence
      it needs, when one comes to look into it closely, to undertake to teach,
      to judge, to write a thick book. . . .”
    

      It struck ten.
    

      “Come, boy, it’s bedtime,” said the prosecutor. “Say
      good-night and go.”
    

      “No, papa,” said Seryozha, “I will stay a little longer.
      Tell me something! Tell me a story. . . .”
    

      “Very well, only after the story you must go to bed at once.”
    

      Yevgeny Petrovitch on his free evenings was in the habit of telling
      Seryozha stories. Like most people engaged in practical affairs, he did
      not know a single poem by heart, and could not remember a single fairy
      tale, so he had to improvise. As a rule he began with the stereotyped:
      “In a certain country, in a certain kingdom,” then he heaped
      up all kinds of innocent nonsense and had no notion as he told the
      beginning how the story would go on, and how it would end. Scenes,
      characters, and situations were taken at random, impromptu, and the plot
      and the moral came of itself as it were, with no plan on the part of the
      story-teller. Seryozha was very fond of this improvisation, and the
      prosecutor noticed that the simpler and the less ingenious the plot, the
      stronger the impression it made on the child.
    

      “Listen,” he said, raising his eyes to the ceiling. “Once
      upon a time, in a certain country, in a certain kingdom, there lived an
      old, very old emperor with a long grey beard, and . . . and with great
      grey moustaches like this. Well, he lived in a glass palace which sparkled
      and glittered in the sun, like a great piece of clear ice. The palace, my
      boy, stood in a huge garden, in which there grew oranges, you know . . .
      bergamots, cherries . . . tulips, roses, and lilies-of-the-valley were in
      flower in it, and birds of different colours sang there. . . . Yes. . . .
      On the trees there hung little glass bells, and, when the wind blew, they
      rang so sweetly that one was never tired of hearing them. Glass gives a
      softer, tenderer note than metals. . . . Well, what next? There were
      fountains in the garden. . . . Do you remember you saw a fountain at
      Auntie Sonya’s summer villa? Well, there were fountains just like
      that in the emperor’s garden, only ever so much bigger, and the jets
      of water reached to the top of the highest poplar.”
    

      Yevgeny Petrovitch thought a moment, and went on:
    

      “The old emperor had an only son and heir of his kingdom—a boy
      as little as you. He was a good boy. He was never naughty, he went to bed
      early, he never touched anything on the table, and altogether he was a
      sensible boy. He had only one fault, he used to smoke. . . .”
    

      Seryozha listened attentively, and looked into his father’s eyes
      without bDlinking. The prosecutor went on, thinking: “What next?”
      He spun out a long rigmarole, and ended like this:
    

      “The emperor’s son fell ill with consumption through smoking,
      and died when he was twenty. His infirm and sick old father was left
      without anyone to help him. There was no one to govern the kingdom and
      defend the palace. Enemies came, killed the old man, and destroyed the
      palace, and now there are neither cherries, nor birds, nor little bells in
      the garden. . . . That’s what happened.”
    

      This ending struck Yevgeny Petrovitch as absurd and naÃ¯ve, but the whole
      story made an intense impression on Seryozha. Again his eyes were clouded
      by mournfulness and something like fear; for a minute he looked pensively
      at the dark window, shuddered, and said, in a sinking voice:
    

      “I am not going to smoke any more. . . .”
    

      When he had said good-night and gone away his father walked up and down
      the room and smiled to himself.
    

      “They would tell me it was the influence of beauty, artistic form,”
      he meditated. “It may be so, but that’s no comfort. It’s
      not the right way, all the same. . . . Why must morality and truth never
      be offered in their crude form, but only with embellishments, sweetened
      and gilded like pills? It’s not normal. . . . It’s
      falsification . . . deception . . . tricks . . . .”
    

      He thought of the jurymen to whom it was absolutely necessary to make a
      “speech,” of the general public who absorb history only from
      legends and historical novels, and of himself and how he had gathered an
      understanding of life not from sermons and laws, but from fables, novels,
      poems.
    

      “Medicine should be sweet, truth beautiful, and man has had this
      foolish habit since the days of Adam . . . though, indeed, perhaps it is
      all natural, and ought to be so. . . . There are many deceptions and
      delusions in nature that serve a purpose.”
    

      He set to work, but lazy, intimate thoughts still strayed through his mind
      for a good while. Overhead the scales could no longer be heard, but the
      inhabitant of the second storey was still pacing from one end of the room
      to another.
    











      A CLASSICAL STUDENT
    

BEFORE setting off
      for his examination in Greek, Vanya kissed all the holy images. His
      stomach felt as though it were upside down; there was a chill at his
      heart, while the heart itself throbbed and stood still with terror before
      the unknown. What would he get that day? A three or a two? Six times he
      went to his mother for her blessing, and, as he went out, asked his aunt
      to pray for him. On the way to school he gave a beggar two kopecks, in the
      hope that those two kopecks would atone for his ignorance, and that,
      please God, he would not get the numerals with those awful forties and
      eighties.
    

      He came back from the high school late, between four and five. He came in,
      and noiselessly lay down on his bed. His thin face was pale. There were
      dark rings round his red eyes.
    

      “Well, how did you get on? How were you marked?” asked his
      mother, going to his bedside.
    

      Vanya bDlinked, twisted his mouth, and burst into tears. His mother turned
      pale, let her mouth fall open, and clasped her hands. The breeches she was
      mending dropped out of her hands.
    

      “What are you crying for? You’ve failed, then?” she
      asked.
    

      “I am plucked. . . . I got a two.”
    

      “I knew it would be so! I had a presentiment of it,” said his
      mother. “Merciful God! How is it you have not passed? What is the
      reason of it? What subject have you failed in?”
    

      “In Greek. . . . Mother, I . . . They asked me the future of phero,
      and I . . . instead of saying oisomai said opsomai. Then . .
      . then there isn’t an accent, if the last syllable is long, and I .
      . . I got flustered. . . . I forgot that the alpha was long in it . . . .
      I went and put in the accent. Then Artaxerxov told me to give the list of
      the enclitic particles. . . . I did, and I accidentally mixed in a pronoun
      . . . and made a mistake . . . and so he gave me a two. . . . I am a
      miserable person. . . . I was working all night. . . I’ve been
      getting up at four o’clock all this week . . . .”
    

      “No, it’s not you but I who am miserable, you wretched boy! It’s
      I that am miserable! You’ve worn me to a threadpaper, you Herod, you
      torment, you bane of my life! I pay for you, you good-for-nothing rubbish;
      I’ve bent my back toiling for you, I’m worried to death, and,
      I may say, I am unhappy, and what do you care? How do you work?”
    

      “I . . . I do work. All night. . . . You’ve seen it yourself.”
    

      “I prayed to God to take me, but He won’t take me, a sinful
      woman . . . . You torment! Other people have children like everyone else,
      and I’ve one only and no sense, no comfort out of him. Beat you? I’d
      beat you, but where am I to find the strength? Mother of God, where am I
      to find the strength?”
    

      The mamma hid her face in the folds of her blouse and broke into sobs.
      Vanya wriggled with anguish and pressed his forehead against the wall. The
      aunt came in.
    

      “So that’s how it is. . . . Just what I expected,” she
      said, at once guessing what was wrong, turning pale and clasping her
      hands. “I’ve been depressed all the morning. . . . There’s
      trouble coming, I thought . . . and here it’s come. . . .”
    

      “The villain, the torment!”
    

      “Why are you swearing at him?” cried the aunt, nervously
      pulling her coffee-coloured kerchief off her head and turning upon the
      mother. “It’s not his fault! It’s your fault! You are to
      blame! Why did you send him to that high school? You are a fine lady! You
      want to be a lady? A-a-ah! I dare say, as though you’ll turn into
      gentry! But if you had sent him, as I told you, into business . . . to an
      office, like my Kuzya . . . here is Kuzya getting five hundred a year. . .
      . Five hundred roubles is worth having, isn’t it? And you are
      wearing yourself out, and wearing the boy out with this studying, plague
      take it! He is thin, he coughs . . . just look at him! He’s
      thirteen, and he looks no more than ten.”
    

      “No, Nastenka, no, my dear! I haven’t thrashed him enough, the
      torment! He ought to have been thrashed, that’s what it is! Ugh . .
      . Jesuit, Mahomet, torment!” she shook her fist at her son. “You
      want a flogging, but I haven’t the strength. They told me years ago
      when he was little, ‘Whip him, whip him!’ I didn’t heed
      them, sinful woman as I am. And now I am suffering for it. You wait a bit!
      I’ll flay you! Wait a bit . . . .”
    

      The mamma shook her wet fist, and went weeping into her lodger’s
      room. The lodger, Yevtihy Kuzmitch Kuporossov, was sitting at his table,
      reading “Dancing Self-taught.” Yevtihy Kuzmitch was a man of
      intelligence and education. He spoke through his nose, washed with a soap
      the smell of which made everyone in the house sneeze, ate meat on fast
      days, and was on the look-out for a bride of refined education, and so was
      considered the cleverest of the lodgers. He sang tenor.
    

      “My good friend,” began the mamma, dissolving into tears.
      “If you would have the generosity—thrash my boy for me. . . .
      Do me the favour! He’s failed in his examination, the nuisance of a
      boy! Would you believe it, he’s failed! I can’t punish him,
      through the weakness of my ill-health. . . . Thrash him for me, if you
      would be so obliging and considerate, Yevtihy Kuzmitch! Have regard for a
      sick woman!”
    

      Kuporossov frowned and heaved a deep sigh through his nose. He thought a
      little, drummed on the table with his fingers, and sighing once more, went
      to Vanya.
    

      “You are being taught, so to say,” he began, “being
      educated, being given a chance, you revolting young person! Why have you
      done it?”
    

      He talked for a long time, made a regular speech. He alluded to science,
      to light, and to darkness.
    

      “Yes, young person.”
    

      When he had finished his speech, he took off his belt and took Vanya by
      the hand.
    

      “It’s the only way to deal with you,” he said. Vanya
      knelt down submissively and thrust his head between the lodger’s
      knees. His prominent pink ears moved up and down against the lodger’s
      new serge trousers, with brown stripes on the outer seams.
    

      Vanya did not utter a single sound. At the family council in the evening,
      it was decided to send him into business.
    











      VANKA
    

VANKA ZHUKOV, a boy
      of nine, who had been for three months apprenticed to Alyahin the
      shoemaker, was sitting up on Christmas Eve. Waiting till his master and
      mistress and their workmen had gone to the midnight service, he took out
      of his master’s cupboard a bottle of ink and a pen with a rusty nib,
      and, spreading out a crumpled sheet of paper in front of him, began
      writing. Before forming the first letter he several times looked round
      fearfully at the door and the windows, stole a glance at the dark ikon, on
      both sides of which stretched shelves full of lasts, and heaved a broken
      sigh. The paper lay on the bench while he knelt before it.
    

      “Dear grandfather, Konstantin Makaritch,” he wrote, “I
      am writing you a letter. I wish you a happy Christmas, and all blessings
      from God Almighty. I have neither father nor mother, you are the only one
      left me.”
    

      Vanka raised his eyes to the dark ikon on which the light of his candle
      was reflected, and vividly recalled his grandfather, Konstantin Makaritch,
      who was night watchman to a family called Zhivarev. He was a thin but
      extraordinarily nimble and lively little old man of sixty-five, with an
      everlastingly laughing face and drunken eyes. By day he slept in the
      servants’ kitchen, or made jokes with the cooks; at night, wrapped
      in an ample sheepskin, he walked round the grounds and tapped with his
      little mallet. Old Kashtanka and Eel, so-called on account of his dark
      colour and his long body like a weasel’s, followed him with hanging
      heads. This Eel was exceptionally polite and affectionate, and looked with
      equal kindness on strangers and his own masters, but had not a very good
      reputation. Under his politeness and meekness was hidden the most
      Jesuitical cunning. No one knew better how to creep up on occasion and
      snap at one’s legs, to slip into the store-room, or steal a hen from
      a peasant. His hind legs had been nearly pulled off more than once, twice
      he had been hanged, every week he was thrashed till he was half dead, but
      he always revived.
    

      At this moment grandfather was, no doubt, standing at the gate, screwing
      up his eyes at the red windows of the church, stamping with his high felt
      boots, and joking with the servants. His little mallet was hanging on his
      belt. He was clasping his hands, shrugging with the cold, and, with an
      aged chuckle, pinching first the housemaid, then the cook.
    

      “How about a pinch of snuff?” he was saying, offering the
      women his snuff-box.
    

      The women would take a sniff and sneeze. Grandfather would be
      indescribably delighted, go off into a merry chuckle, and cry:
    

      “Tear it off, it has frozen on!”
    

      They give the dogs a sniff of snuff too. Kashtanka sneezes, wriggles her
      head, and walks away offended. Eel does not sneeze, from politeness, but
      wags his tail. And the weather is glorious. The air is still, fresh, and
      transparent. The night is dark, but one can see the whole village with its
      white roofs and coils of smoke coming from the chimneys, the trees
      silvered with hoar frost, the snowdrifts. The whole sky spangled with gay
      twinkling stars, and the Milky Way is as distinct as though it had been
      washed and rubbed with snow for a holiday. . . .
    

      Vanka sighed, dipped his pen, and went on writing:
    

      “And yesterday I had a wigging. The master pulled me out into the
      yard by my hair, and whacked me with a boot-stretcher because I
      accidentally fell asleep while I was rocking their brat in the cradle. And
      a week ago the mistress told me to clean a herring, and I began from the
      tail end, and she took the herring and thrust its head in my face. The
      workmen laugh at me and send me to the tavern for vodka, and tell me to
      steal the master’s cucumbers for them, and the master beats me with
      anything that comes to hand. And there is nothing to eat. In the morning
      they give me bread, for dinner, porridge, and in the evening, bread again;
      but as for tea, or soup, the master and mistress gobble it all up
      themselves. And I am put to sleep in the passage, and when their wretched
      brat cries I get no sleep at all, but have to rock the cradle. Dear
      grandfather, show the divine mercy, take me away from here, home to the
      village. It’s more than I can bear. I bow down to your feet, and
      will pray to God for you for ever, take me away from here or I shall die.”
    

      Vanka’s mouth worked, he rubbed his eyes with his black fist, and
      gave a sob.
    

      “I will powder your snuff for you,” he went on. “I will
      pray for you, and if I do anything you can thrash me like Sidor’s
      goat. And if you think I’ve no job, then I will beg the steward for
      Christ’s sake to let me clean his boots, or I’ll go for a
      shepherd-boy instead of Fedka. Dear grandfather, it is more than I can
      bear, it’s simply no life at all. I wanted to run away to the
      village, but I have no boots, and I am afraid of the frost. When I grow up
      big I will take care of you for this, and not let anyone annoy you, and
      when you die I will pray for the rest of your soul, just as for my mammy’s.”
    

      “Moscow is a big town. It’s all gentlemen’s houses, and
      there are lots of horses, but there are no sheep, and the dogs are not
      spiteful. The lads here don’t go out with the star, and they don’t
      let anyone go into the choir, and once I saw in a shop window
      fishing-hooks for sale, fitted ready with the line and for all sorts of
      fish, awfully good ones, there was even one hook that would hold a
      forty-pound sheat-fish. And I have seen shops where there are guns of all
      sorts, after the pattern of the master’s guns at home, so that I
      shouldn’t wonder if they are a hundred roubles each. . . . And in
      the butchers’ shops there are grouse and woodcocks and fish and
      hares, but the shopmen don’t say where they shoot them.”
    

      “Dear grandfather, when they have the Christmas tree at the big
      house, get me a gilt walnut, and put it away in the green trunk. Ask the
      young lady Olga Ignatyevna, say it’s for Vanka.”
    

      Vanka gave a tremulous sigh, and again stared at the window. He remembered
      how his grandfather always went into the forest to get the Christmas tree
      for his master’s family, and took his grandson with him. It was a
      merry time! Grandfather made a noise in his throat, the forest crackled
      with the frost, and looking at them Vanka chortled too. Before chopping
      down the Christmas tree, grandfather would smoke a pipe, slowly take a
      pinch of snuff, and laugh at frozen Vanka. . . . The young fir trees,
      covered with hoar frost, stood motionless, waiting to see which of them
      was to die. Wherever one looked, a hare flew like an arrow over the
      snowdrifts . . . . Grandfather could not refrain from shouting: “Hold
      him, hold him . . . hold him! Ah, the bob-tailed devil!”
    

      When he had cut down the Christmas tree, grandfather used to drag it to
      the big house, and there set to work to decorate it. . . . The young lady,
      who was Vanka’s favourite, Olga Ignatyevna, was the busiest of all.
      When Vanka’s mother Pelageya was alive, and a servant in the big
      house, Olga Ignatyevna used to give him goodies, and having nothing better
      to do, taught him to read and write, to count up to a hundred, and even to
      dance a quadrille. When Pelageya died, Vanka had been transferred to the
      servants’ kitchen to be with his grandfather, and from the kitchen
      to the shoemaker’s in Moscow.
    

      “Do come, dear grandfather,” Vanka went on with his letter.
      “For Christ’s sake, I beg you, take me away. Have pity on an
      unhappy orphan like me; here everyone knocks me about, and I am fearfully
      hungry; I can’t tell you what misery it is, I am always crying. And
      the other day the master hit me on the head with a last, so that I fell
      down. My life is wretched, worse than any dog’s. . . . I send
      greetings to Alyona, one-eyed Yegorka, and the coachman, and don’t
      give my concertina to anyone. I remain, your grandson, Ivan Zhukov. Dear
      grandfather, do come.”
    

      Vanka folded the sheet of writing-paper twice, and put it into an envelope
      he had bought the day before for a kopeck. . . . After thinking a little,
      he dipped the pen and wrote the address:
    

              To grandfather in the village.


      Then he scratched his head, thought a little, and added: Konstantin
      Makaritch. Glad that he had not been prevented from writing, he put on
      his cap and, without putting on his little greatcoat, ran out into the
      street as he was in his shirt. . . .
    

      The shopmen at the butcher’s, whom he had questioned the day before,
      told him that letters were put in post-boxes, and from the boxes were
      carried about all over the earth in mailcarts with drunken drivers and
      ringing bells. Vanka ran to the nearest post-box, and thrust the precious
      letter in the slit. . . .
    

      An hour later, lulled by sweet hopes, he was sound asleep. . . . He
      dreamed of the stove. On the stove was sitting his grandfather, swinging
      his bare legs, and reading the letter to the cooks. . . .
    

      By the stove was Eel, wagging his tail.
    











      AN INCIDENT
    

MORNING. Brilliant
      sunshine is piercing through the frozen lacework on the window-panes into
      the nursery. Vanya, a boy of six, with a cropped head and a nose like a
      button, and his sister Nina, a short, chubby, curly-headed girl of four,
      wake up and look crossly at each other through the bars of their cots.
    

      “Oo-oo-oo! naughty children!” grumbles their nurse. “Good
      people have had their breakfast already, while you can’t get your
      eyes open.”
    

      The sunbeams frolic over the rugs, the walls, and nurse’s skirts,
      and seem inviting the children to join in their play, but they take no
      notice. They have woken up in a bad humour. Nina pouts, makes a grimace,
      and begins to whine:
    

      “Brea-eakfast, nurse, breakfast!”
    

      Vanya knits his brows and ponders what to pitch upon to howl over. He has
      already begun screwing up his eyes and opening his mouth, but at that
      instant the voice of mamma reaches them from the drawing-room, saying:
      “Don’t forget to give the cat her milk, she has a family now!”
    

      The children’s puckered countenances grow smooth again as they look
      at each other in astonishment. Then both at once begin shouting, jump out
      of their cots, and filling the air with piercing shrieks, run barefoot, in
      their nightgowns, to the kitchen.
    

      “The cat has puppies!” they cry. “The cat has got
      puppies!”
    

      Under the bench in the kitchen there stands a small box, the one in which
      Stepan brings coal when he lights the fire. The cat is peeping out of the
      box. There is an expression of extreme exhaustion on her grey face; her
      green eyes, with their narrow black pupils, have a languid, sentimental
      look. From her face it is clear that the only thing lacking to complete
      her happiness is the presence in the box of “him,” the father
      of her children, to whom she had abandoned herself so recklessly! She
      wants to mew, and opens her mouth wide, but nothing but a hiss comes from
      her throat; the squealing of the kittens is audible.
    

      The children squat on their heels before the box, and, motionless, holding
      their breath, gaze at the cat. . . . They are surprised, impressed, and do
      not hear nurse grumbling as she pursues them. The most genuine delight
      shines in the eyes of both.
    

      Domestic animals play a scarcely noticed but undoubtedly beneficial part
      in the education and life of children. Which of us does not remember
      powerful but magnanimous dogs, lazy lapdogs, birds dying in captivity,
      dull-witted but haughty turkeys, mild old tabby cats, who forgave us when
      we trod on their tails for fun and caused them agonising pain? I even
      fancy, sometimes, that the patience, the fidelity, the readiness to
      forgive, and the sincerity which are characteristic of our domestic
      animals have a far stronger and more definite effect on the mind of a
      child than the long exhortations of some dry, pale Karl Karlovitch, or the
      misty expositions of a governess, trying to prove to children that water
      is made up of hydrogen and oxygen.
    

      “What little things!” says Nina, opening her eyes wide and
      going off into a joyous laugh. “They are like mice!”
    

      “One, two, three,” Vanya counts. “Three kittens. So
      there is one for you, one for me, and one for somebody else, too.”
    

      “Murrm . . . murrm . . .” purrs the mother, flattered by their
      attention. “Murrm.”
    

      After gazing at the kittens, the children take them from under the cat,
      and begin squeezing them in their hands, then, not satisfied with this,
      they put them in the skirts of their nightgowns, and run into the other
      rooms.
    

      “Mamma, the cat has got pups!” they shout.
    

      Mamma is sitting in the drawing-room with some unknown gentleman. Seeing
      the children unwashed, undressed, with their nightgowns held up high, she
      is embarrassed, and looks at them severely.
    

      “Let your nightgowns down, disgraceful children,” she says.
      “Go out of the room, or I will punish you.”
    

      But the children do not notice either mamma’s threats or the
      presence of a stranger. They put the kittens down on the carpet, and go
      off into deafening squeals. The mother walks round them, mewing
      imploringly. When, a little afterwards, the children are dragged off to
      the nursery, dressed, made to say their prayers, and given their
      breakfast, they are full of a passionate desire to get away from these
      prosaic duties as quickly as possible, and to run to the kitchen again.
    

      Their habitual pursuits and games are thrown completely into the
      background.
    

      The kittens throw everything into the shade by making their appearance in
      the world, and supply the great sensation of the day. If Nina or Vanya had
      been offered forty pounds of sweets or ten thousand kopecks for each
      kitten, they would have rejected such a barter without the slightest
      hesitation. In spite of the heated protests of the nurse and the cook, the
      children persist in sitting by the cat’s box in the kitchen, busy
      with the kittens till dinner-time. Their faces are earnest and
      concentrated and express anxiety. They are worried not so much by the
      present as by the future of the kittens. They decide that one kitten shall
      remain at home with the old cat to be a comfort to her mother, while the
      second shall go to their summer villa, and the third shall live in the
      cellar, where there are ever so many rats.
    

      “But why don’t they look at us?” Nina wondered. “Their
      eyes are blind like the beggars’.”
    

      Vanya, too, is perturbed by this question. He tries to open one kitten’s
      eyes, and spends a long time puffing and breathing hard over it, but his
      operation is unsuccessful. They are a good deal troubled, too, by the
      circumstance that the kittens obstinately refuse the milk and the meat
      that is offered to them. Everything that is put before their little noses
      is eaten by their grey mamma.
    

      “Let’s build the kittens little houses,” Vanya suggests.
      “They shall live in different houses, and the cat shall come and pay
      them visits. . . .”
    

      Cardboard hat-boxes are put in the different corners of the kitchen and
      the kittens are installed in them. But this division turns out to be
      premature; the cat, still wearing an imploring and sentimental expression
      on her face, goes the round of all the hat-boxes, and carries off her
      children to their original position.
    

      “The cat’s their mother,” observed Vanya, “but who
      is their father?”
    

      “Yes, who is their father?” repeats Nina.
    

      “They must have a father.”
    

      Vanya and Nina are a long time deciding who is to be the kittens’
      father, and, in the end, their choice falls on a big dark-red horse
      without a tail, which is lying in the store-cupboard under the stairs,
      together with other relics of toys that have outlived their day. They drag
      him up out of the store-cupboard and stand him by the box.
    

      “Mind now!” they admonish him, “stand here and see they
      behave themselves properly.”
    

      All this is said and done in the gravest way, with an expression of
      anxiety on their faces. Vanya and Nina refuse to recognise the existence
      of any world but the box of kittens. Their joy knows no bounds. But they
      have to pass through bitter, agonising moments, too.
    

      Just before dinner, Vanya is sitting in his father’s study, gazing
      dreamily at the table. A kitten is moving about by the lamp, on stamped
      note paper. Vanya is watching its movements, and thrusting first a pencil,
      then a match into its little mouth. . . . All at once, as though he has
      sprung out of the floor, his father is beside the table.
    

      “What’s this?” Vanya hears, in an angry voice.
    

      “It’s . . . it’s the kitty, papa. . . .”
    

      “I’ll give it you; look what you have done, you naughty boy!
      You’ve dirtied all my paper!”
    

      To Vanya’s great surprise his papa does not share his partiality for
      the kittens, and, instead of being moved to enthusiasm and delight, he
      pulls Vanya’s ear and shouts:
    

      “Stepan, take away this horrid thing.”
    

      At dinner, too, there is a scene. . . . During the second course there is
      suddenly the sound of a shrill mew. They begin to investigate its origin,
      and discover a kitten under Nina’s pinafore.
    

      “Nina, leave the table!” cries her father angrily. “Throw
      the kittens in the cesspool! I won’t have the nasty things in the
      house! . . .”
    

      Vanya and Nina are horrified. Death in the cesspool, apart from its
      cruelty, threatens to rob the cat and the wooden horse of their children,
      to lay waste the cat’s box, to destroy their plans for the future,
      that fair future in which one cat will be a comfort to its old mother,
      another will live in the country, while the third will catch rats in the
      cellar. The children begin to cry and entreat that the kittens may be
      spared. Their father consents, but on the condition that the children do
      not go into the kitchen and touch the kittens.
    

      After dinner, Vanya and Nina slouch about the rooms, feeling depressed.
      The prohibition of visits to the kitchen has reduced them to dejection.
      They refuse sweets, are naughty, and are rude to their mother. When their
      uncle Petrusha comes in the evening, they draw him aside, and complain to
      him of their father, who wanted to throw the kittens into the cesspool.
    

      “Uncle Petrusha, tell mamma to have the kittens taken to the
      nursery,” the children beg their uncle, “do-o tell her.”
    

      “There, there . . . very well,” says their uncle, waving them
      off. “All right.”
    

      Uncle Petrusha does not usually come alone. He is accompanied by Nero, a
      big black dog of Danish breed, with drooping ears, and a tail as hard as a
      stick. The dog is silent, morose, and full of a sense of his own dignity.
      He takes not the slightest notice of the children, and when he passes them
      hits them with his tail as though they were chairs. The children hate him
      from the bottom of their hearts, but on this occasion, practical
      considerations override sentiment.
    

      “I say, Nina,” says Vanya, opening his eyes wide. “Let
      Nero be their father, instead of the horse! The horse is dead and he is
      alive, you see.”
    

      They are waiting the whole evening for the moment when papa will sit down
      to his cards and it will be possible to take Nero to the kitchen without
      being observed. . . . At last, papa sits down to cards, mamma is busy with
      the samovar and not noticing the children. . . .
    

      The happy moment arrives.
    

      “Come along!” Vanya whispers to his sister.
    

      But, at that moment, Stepan comes in and, with a snigger, announces:
    

      “Nero has eaten the kittens, madam.”
    

      Nina and Vanya turn pale and look at Stepan with horror.
    

      “He really has . . .” laughs the footman, “he went to
      the box and gobbled them up.”
    

      The children expect that all the people in the house will be aghast and
      fall upon the miscreant Nero. But they all sit calmly in their seats, and
      only express surprise at the appetite of the huge dog. Papa and mamma
      laugh. Nero walks about by the table, wags his tail, and licks his lips
      complacently . . . the cat is the only one who is uneasy. With her tail in
      the air she walks about the rooms, looking suspiciously at people and
      mewing plaintively.
    

      “Children, it’s past nine,” cries mamma, “it’s
      bedtime.”
    

      Vanya and Nina go to bed, shed tears, and spend a long time thinking about
      the injured cat, and the cruel, insolent, and unpunished Nero.
    











      A DAY IN THE COUNTRY
    

      BETWEEN eight and nine o’clock in the morning.
    

A dark
      leaden-coloured mass is creeping over the sky towards the sun. Red zigzags
      of lightning gleam here and there across it. There is a sound of far-away
      rumbling. A warm wind frolics over the grass, bends the trees, and stirs
      up the dust. In a minute there will be a spurt of May rain and a real
      storm will begin.
    

      Fyokla, a little beggar-girl of six, is running through the village,
      looking for Terenty the cobbler. The white-haired, barefoot child is pale.
      Her eyes are wide-open, her lips are trembling.
    

      “Uncle, where is Terenty?” she asks every one she meets. No
      one answers. They are all preoccupied with the approaching storm and take
      refuge in their huts. At last she meets Silanty Silitch, the sacristan,
      Terenty’s bosom friend. He is coming along, staggering from the
      wind.
    

      “Uncle, where is Terenty?”
    

      “At the kitchen-gardens,” answers Silanty.
    

      The beggar-girl runs behind the huts to the kitchen-gardens and there
      finds Terenty; the tall old man with a thin, pock-marked face, very long
      legs, and bare feet, dressed in a woman’s tattered jacket, is
      standing near the vegetable plots, looking with drowsy, drunken eyes at
      the dark storm-cloud. On his long crane-like legs he sways in the wind
      like a starling-cote.
    

      “Uncle Terenty!” the white-headed beggar-girl addresses him.
      “Uncle, darling!”
    

      Terenty bends down to Fyokla, and his grim, drunken face is overspread
      with a smile, such as come into people’s faces when they look at
      something little, foolish, and absurd, but warmly loved.
    

      “Ah! servant of God, Fyokia,” he says, lisping tenderly,
      “where have you come from?”
    

      “Uncle Terenty,” says Fyokia, with a sob, tugging at the lapel
      of the cobbler’s coat. “Brother Danilka has had an accident!
      Come along!”
    

      “What sort of accident? Ough, what thunder! Holy, holy, holy. . . .
      What sort of accident?”
    

      “In the count’s copse Danilka stuck his hand into a hole in a
      tree, and he can’t get it out. Come along, uncle, do be kind and
      pull his hand out!”
    

      “How was it he put his hand in? What for?”
    

      “He wanted to get a cuckoo’s egg out of the hole for me.”
    

      “The day has hardly begun and already you are in trouble. . . .”
      Terenty shook his head and spat deliberately. “Well, what am I to do
      with you now? I must come . . . I must, may the wolf gobble you up, you
      naughty children! Come, little orphan!”
    

      Terenty comes out of the kitchen-garden and, lifting high his long legs,
      begins striding down the village street. He walks quickly without stopping
      or looking from side to side, as though he were shoved from behind or
      afraid of pursuit. Fyokla can hardly keep up with him.
    

      They come out of the village and turn along the dusty road towards the
      count’s copse that lies dark blue in the distance. It is about a
      mile and a half away. The clouds have by now covered the sun, and soon
      afterwards there is not a speck of blue left in the sky. It grows dark.
    

      “Holy, holy, holy . . .” whispers Fyokla, hurrying after
      Terenty. The first rain-drops, big and heavy, lie, dark dots on the dusty
      road. A big drop falls on Fyokla’s cheek and glides like a tear down
      her chin.
    

      “The rain has begun,” mutters the cobbler, kicking up the dust
      with his bare, bony feet. “That’s fine, Fyokla, old girl. The
      grass and the trees are fed by the rain, as we are by bread. And as for
      the thunder, don’t you be frightened, little orphan. Why should it
      kill a little thing like you?”
    

      As soon as the rain begins, the wind drops. The only sound is the patter
      of rain dropping like fine shot on the young rye and the parched road.
    

      “We shall get soaked, Fyolka,” mutters Terenty. “There
      won’t be a dry spot left on us. . . . Ho-ho, my girl! It’s run
      down my neck! But don’t be frightened, silly. . . . The grass will
      be dry again, the earth will be dry again, and we shall be dry again.
      There is the same sun for us all.”
    

      A flash of lightning, some fourteen feet long, gleams above their heads.
      There is a loud peal of thunder, and it seems to Fyokla that something
      big, heavy, and round is rolling over the sky and tearing it open, exactly
      over her head.
    

      “Holy, holy, holy . . .” says Terenty, crossing himself.
      “Don’t be afraid, little orphan! It is not from spite that it
      thunders.”
    

      Terenty’s and Fyokla’s feet are covered with lumps of heavy,
      wet clay. It is slippery and difficult to walk, but Terenty strides on
      more and more rapidly. The weak little beggar-girl is breathless and ready
      to drop.
    

      But at last they go into the count’s copse. The washed trees,
      stirred by a gust of wind, drop a perfect waterfall upon them. Terenty
      stumbles over stumps and begins to slacken his pace.
    

      “Whereabouts is Danilka?” he asks. “Lead me to him.”
    

      Fyokla leads him into a thicket, and, after going a quarter of a mile,
      points to Danilka. Her brother, a little fellow of eight, with hair as red
      as ochre and a pale sickly face, stands leaning against a tree, and, with
      his head on one side, looking sideways at the sky. In one hand he holds
      his shabby old cap, the other is hidden in an old lime tree. The boy is
      gazing at the stormy sky, and apparently not thinking of his trouble.
      Hearing footsteps and seeing the cobbler he gives a sickly smile and says:
    

      “A terrible lot of thunder, Terenty. . . . I’ve never heard so
      much thunder in all my life.”
    

      “And where is your hand?”
    

      “In the hole. . . . Pull it out, please, Terenty!”
    

      The wood had broken at the edge of the hole and jammed Danilka’s
      hand: he could push it farther in, but could not pull it out. Terenty
      snaps off the broken piece, and the boy’s hand, red and crushed, is
      released.
    

      “It’s terrible how it’s thundering,” the boy says
      again, rubbing his hand. “What makes it thunder, Terenty?”
    

      “One cloud runs against the other,” answers the cobbler. The
      party come out of the copse, and walk along the edge of it towards the
      darkened road. The thunder gradually abates, and its rumbling is heard far
      away beyond the village.
    

      “The ducks flew by here the other day, Terenty,” says Danilka,
      still rubbing his hand. “They must be nesting in the Gniliya
      Zaimishtcha marshes. . . . Fyolka, would you like me to show you a
      nightingale’s nest?”
    

      “Don’t touch it, you might disturb them,” says Terenty,
      wringing the water out of his cap. “The nightingale is a
      singing-bird, without sin. He has had a voice given him in his throat, to
      praise God and gladden the heart of man. It’s a sin to disturb him.”
    

      “What about the sparrow?”
    

      “The sparrow doesn’t matter, he’s a bad, spiteful bird.
      He is like a pickpocket in his ways. He doesn’t like man to be
      happy. When Christ was crucified it was the sparrow brought nails to the
      Jews, and called ‘alive! alive!’”
    

      A bright patch of blue appears in the sky.
    

      “Look!” says Terenty. “An ant-heap burst open by the
      rain! They’ve been flooded, the rogues!”
    

      They bend over the ant-heap. The downpour has damaged it; the insects are
      scurrying to and fro in the mud, agitated, and busily trying to carry away
      their drowned companions.
    

      “You needn’t be in such a taking, you won’t die of it!”
      says Terenty, grinning. “As soon as the sun warms you, you’ll
      come to your senses again. . . . It’s a lesson to you, you stupids.
      You won’t settle on low ground another time.”
    

      They go on.
    

      “And here are some bees,” cries Danilka, pointing to the
      branch of a young oak tree.
    

      The drenched and chilled bees are huddled together on the branch. There
      are so many of them that neither bark nor leaf can be seen. Many of them
      are settled on one another.
    

      “That’s a swarm of bees,” Terenty informs them. “They
      were flying looking for a home, and when the rain came down upon them they
      settled. If a swarm is flying, you need only sprinkle water on them to
      make them settle. Now if, say, you wanted to take the swarm, you would
      bend the branch with them into a sack and shake it, and they all fall in.”
    

      Little Fyokla suddenly frowns and rubs her neck vigorously. Her brother
      looks at her neck, and sees a big swelling on it.
    

      “Hey-hey!” laughs the cobbler. “Do you know where you
      got that from, Fyokia, old girl? There are Spanish flies on some tree in
      the wood. The rain has trickled off them, and a drop has fallen on your
      neck —that’s what has made the swelling.”
    

      The sun appears from behind the clouds and floods the wood, the fields,
      and the three friends with its warm light. The dark menacing cloud has
      gone far away and taken the storm with it. The air is warm and fragrant.
      There is a scent of bird-cherry, meadowsweet, and lilies-of-the-valley.
    

      “That herb is given when your nose bleeds,” says Terenty,
      pointing to a woolly-looking flower. “It does good.”
    

      They hear a whistle and a rumble, but not such a rumble as the
      storm-clouds carried away. A goods train races by before the eyes of
      Terenty, Danilka, and Fyokla. The engine, panting and puffing out black
      smoke, drags more than twenty vans after it. Its power is tremendous. The
      children are interested to know how an engine, not alive and without the
      help of horses, can move and drag such weights, and Terenty undertakes to
      explain it to them:
    

      “It’s all the steam’s doing, children. . . . The steam
      does the work. . . . You see, it shoves under that thing near the wheels,
      and it . . . you see . . . it works. . . .”
    

      They cross the railway line, and, going down from the embankment, walk
      towards the river. They walk not with any object, but just at random, and
      talk all the way. . . . Danilka asks questions, Terenty answers them. . .
      .
    

      Terenty answers all his questions, and there is no secret in Nature which
      baffles him. He knows everything. Thus, for example, he knows the names of
      all the wild flowers, animals, and stones. He knows what herbs cure
      diseases, he has no difficulty in telling the age of a horse or a cow.
      Looking at the sunset, at the moon, or the birds, he can tell what sort of
      weather it will be next day. And indeed, it is not only Terenty who is so
      wise. Silanty Silitch, the innkeeper, the market-gardener, the shepherd,
      and all the villagers, generally speaking, know as much as he does. These
      people have learned not from books, but in the fields, in the wood, on the
      river bank. Their teachers have been the birds themselves, when they sang
      to them, the sun when it left a glow of crimson behind it at setting, the
      very trees, and wild herbs.
    

      Danilka looks at Terenty and greedily drinks in every word. In spring,
      before one is weary of the warmth and the monotonous green of the fields,
      when everything is fresh and full of fragrance, who would not want to hear
      about the golden may-beetles, about the cranes, about the gurgling
      streams, and the corn mounting into ear?
    

      The two of them, the cobbler and the orphan, walk about the fields, talk
      unceasingly, and are not weary. They could wander about the world
      endlessly. They walk, and in their talk of the beauty of the earth do not
      notice the frail little beggar-girl tripping after them. She is breathless
      and moves with a lagging step. There are tears in her eyes; she would be
      glad to stop these inexhaustible wanderers, but to whom and where can she
      go? She has no home or people of her own; whether she likes it or not, she
      must walk and listen to their talk.
    

      Towards midday, all three sit down on the river bank. Danilka takes out of
      his bag a piece of bread, soaked and reduced to a mash, and they begin to
      eat. Terenty says a prayer when he has eaten the bread, then stretches
      himself on the sandy bank and falls asleep. While he is asleep, the boy
      gazes at the water, pondering. He has many different things to think of.
      He has just seen the storm, the bees, the ants, the train. Now, before his
      eyes, fishes are whisking about. Some are two inches long and more, others
      are no bigger than one’s nail. A viper, with its head held high, is
      swimming from one bank to the other.
    

      Only towards the evening our wanderers return to the village. The children
      go for the night to a deserted barn, where the corn of the commune used to
      be kept, while Terenty, leaving them, goes to the tavern. The children lie
      huddled together on the straw, dozing.
    

      The boy does not sleep. He gazes into the darkness, and it seems to him
      that he is seeing all that he has seen in the day: the storm-clouds, the
      bright sunshine, the birds, the fish, lanky Terenty. The number of his
      impressions, together with exhaustion and hunger, are too much for him; he
      is as hot as though he were on fire, and tosses from, side to side. He
      longs to tell someone all that is haunting him now in the darkness and
      agitating his soul, but there is no one to tell. Fyokla is too little and
      could not understand.
    

      “I’ll tell Terenty to-morrow,” thinks the boy.
    

      The children fall asleep thinking of the homeless cobbler, and, in the
      night, Terenty comes to them, makes the sign of the cross over them, and
      puts bread under their heads. And no one sees his love. It is seen only by
      the moon which floats in the sky and peeps caressingly through the holes
      in the wall of the deserted barn.
    











      BOYS
    

      “VOLODYA’S come!” someone shouted in the yard.
    

“Master
      Volodya’s here!” bawled Natalya the cook, running into the
      dining-room. “Oh, my goodness!”
    

      The whole Korolyov family, who had been expecting their Volodya from hour
      to hour, rushed to the windows. At the front door stood a wide sledge,
      with three white horses in a cloud of steam. The sledge was empty, for
      Volodya was already in the hall, untying his hood with red and chilly
      fingers. His school overcoat, his cap, his snowboots, and the hair on his
      temples were all white with frost, and his whole figure from head to foot
      diffused such a pleasant, fresh smell of the snow that the very sight of
      him made one want to shiver and say “brrr!”
    

      His mother and aunt ran to kiss and hug him. Natalya plumped down at his
      feet and began pulling off his snowboots, his sisters shrieked with
      delight, the doors creaked and banged, and Volodya’s father, in his
      waistcoat and shirt-sleeves, ran out into the hall with scissors in his
      hand, and cried out in alarm:
    

      “We were expecting you all yesterday? Did you come all right? Had a
      good journey? Mercy on us! you might let him say ‘how do you do’
      to his father! I am his father after all!”
    

      “Bow-wow!” barked the huge black dog, Milord, in a deep bass,
      tapping with his tail on the walls and furniture.
    

      For two minutes there was nothing but a general hubbub of joy. After the
      first outburst of delight was over the Korolyovs noticed that there was,
      besides their Volodya, another small person in the hall, wrapped up in
      scarves and shawls and white with frost. He was standing perfectly still
      in a corner, in the shadow of a big fox-lined overcoat.
    

      “Volodya darling, who is it?” asked his mother, in a whisper.
    

      “Oh!” cried Volodya. “This is—let me introduce my
      friend Lentilov, a schoolfellow in the second class. . . . I have brought
      him to stay with us.”
    

      “Delighted to hear it! You are very welcome,” the father said
      cordially. “Excuse me, I’ve been at work without my coat. . .
      . Please come in! Natalya, help Mr. Lentilov off with his things. Mercy on
      us, do turn that dog out! He is unendurable!”
    

      A few minutes later, Volodya and his friend Lentilov, somewhat dazed by
      their noisy welcome, and still red from the outside cold, were sitting
      down to tea. The winter sun, making its way through the snow and the
      frozen tracery on the window-panes, gleamed on the samovar, and plunged
      its pure rays in the tea-basin. The room was warm, and the boys felt as
      though the warmth and the frost were struggling together with a tingling
      sensation in their bodies.
    

      “Well, Christmas will soon be here,” the father said in a
      pleasant sing-song voice, rolling a cigarette of dark reddish tobacco.
      “It doesn’t seem long since the summer, when mamma was crying
      at your going . . . and here you are back again. . . . Time flies, my boy.
      Before you have time to cry out, old age is upon you. Mr. Lentilov, take
      some more, please help yourself! We don’t stand on ceremony!”
    

      Volodya’s three sisters, Katya, Sonya, and Masha (the eldest was
      eleven), sat at the table and never took their eyes off the newcomer.
    

      Lentilov was of the same height and age as Volodya, but not as round-faced
      and fair-skinned. He was thin, dark, and freckled; his hair stood up like
      a brush, his eyes were small, and his lips were thick. He was, in fact,
      distinctly ugly, and if he had not been wearing the school uniform, he
      might have been taken for the son of a cook. He seemed morose, did not
      speak, and never once smiled. The little girls, staring at him,
      immediately came to the conclusion that he must be a very clever and
      learned person. He seemed to be thinking about something all the time, and
      was so absorbed in his own thoughts, that, whenever he was spoken to, he
      started, threw his head back, and asked to have the question repeated.
    

      The little girls noticed that Volodya, who had always been so merry and
      talkative, also said very little, did not smile at all, and hardly seemed
      to be glad to be home. All the time they were at tea he only once
      addressed his sisters, and then he said something so strange. He pointed
      to the samovar and said:
    

      “In California they don’t drink tea, but gin.”
    

      He, too, seemed absorbed in his own thoughts, and, to judge by the looks
      that passed between him and his friend Lentilov, their thoughts were the
      same.
    

      After tea, they all went into the nursery. The girls and their father took
      up the work that had been interrupted by the arrival of the boys. They
      were making flowers and frills for the Christmas tree out of paper of
      different colours. It was an attractive and noisy occupation. Every fresh
      flower was greeted by the little girls with shrieks of delight, even of
      awe, as though the flower had dropped straight from heaven; their father
      was in ecstasies too, and every now and then he threw the scissors on the
      floor, in vexation at their bluntness. Their mother kept running into the
      nursery with an anxious face, asking:
    

      “Who has taken my scissors? Ivan Nikolaitch, have you taken my
      scissors again?”
    

      “Mercy on us! I’m not even allowed a pair of scissors!”
      their father would respond in a lachrymose voice, and, flinging himself
      back in his chair, he would pretend to be a deeply injured man; but a
      minute later, he would be in ecstasies again.
    

      On his former holidays Volodya, too, had taken part in the preparations
      for the Christmas tree, or had been running in the yard to look at the
      snow mountain that the watchman and the shepherd were building. But this
      time Volodya and Lentilov took no notice whatever of the coloured paper,
      and did not once go into the stable. They sat in the window and began
      whispering to one another; then they opened an atlas and looked carefully
      at a map.
    

      “First to Perm . . .” Lentilov said, in an undertone, “from
      there to Tiumen, then Tomsk . . . then . . . then . . . Kamchatka. There
      the Samoyedes take one over Behring’s Straits in boats . . . . And
      then we are in America. . . . There are lots of furry animals there. . . .”
    

      “And California?” asked Volodya.
    

      “California is lower down. . . . We’ve only to get to America
      and California is not far off. . . . And one can get a living by hunting
      and plunder.”
    

      All day long Lentilov avoided the little girls, and seemed to look at them
      with suspicion. In the evening he happened to be left alone with them for
      five minutes or so. It was awkward to be silent.
    

      He cleared his throat morosely, rubbed his left hand against his right,
      looked sullenly at Katya and asked:
    

      “Have you read Mayne Reid?”
    

      “No, I haven’t. . . . I say, can you skate?”
    

      Absorbed in his own reflections, Lentilov made no reply to this question;
      he simply puffed out his cheeks, and gave a long sigh as though he were
      very hot. He looked up at Katya once more and said:
    

      “When a herd of bisons stampedes across the prairie the earth
      trembles, and the frightened mustangs kick and neigh.”
    

      He smiled impressively and added:
    

      “And the Indians attack the trains, too. But worst of all are the
      mosquitoes and the termites.”
    

      “Why, what’s that?”
    

      “They’re something like ants, but with wings. They bite
      fearfully. Do you know who I am?”
    

      “Mr. Lentilov.”
    

      “No, I am Montehomo, the Hawk’s Claw, Chief of the Ever
      Victorious.”
    

      Masha, the youngest, looked at him, then into the darkness out of window
      and said, wondering:
    

      “And we had lentils for supper yesterday.”
    

      Lentilov’s incomprehensible utterances, and the way he was always
      whispering with Volodya, and the way Volodya seemed now to be always
      thinking about something instead of playing . . . all this was strange and
      mysterious. And the two elder girls, Katya and Sonya, began to keep a
      sharp look-out on the boys. At night, when the boys had gone to bed, the
      girls crept to their bedroom door, and listened to what they were saying.
      Ah, what they discovered! The boys were planning to run away to America to
      dig for gold: they had everything ready for the journey, a pistol, two
      knives, biscuits, a burning glass to serve instead of matches, a compass,
      and four roubles in cash. They learned that the boys would have to walk
      some thousands of miles, and would have to fight tigers and savages on the
      road: then they would get gold and ivory, slay their enemies, become
      pirates, drink gin, and finally marry beautiful maidens, and make a
      plantation.
    

      The boys interrupted each other in their excitement. Throughout the
      conversation, Lentilov called himself “Montehomo, the Hawk’s
      Claw,” and Volodya was “my pale-face brother!”
    

      “Mind you don’t tell mamma,” said Katya, as they went
      back to bed. “Volodya will bring us gold and ivory from America, but
      if you tell mamma he won’t be allowed to go.”
    

      The day before Christmas Eve, Lentilov spent the whole day poring over the
      map of Asia and making notes, while Volodya, with a languid and swollen
      face that looked as though it had been stung by a bee, walked about the
      rooms and ate nothing. And once he stood still before the holy image in
      the nursery, crossed himself, and said:
    

      “Lord, forgive me a sinner; Lord, have pity on my poor unhappy
      mamma!”
    

      In the evening he burst out crying. On saying good-night he gave his
      father a long hug, and then hugged his mother and sisters. Katya and Sonya
      knew what was the matter, but little Masha was puzzled, completely
      puzzled. Every time she looked at Lentilov she grew thoughtful and said
      with a sigh:
    

      “When Lent comes, nurse says we shall have to eat peas and lentils.”
    

      Early in the morning of Christmas Eve, Katya and Sonya slipped quietly out
      of bed, and went to find out how the boys meant to run away to America.
      They crept to their door.
    

      “Then you don’t mean to go?” Lentilov was saying
      angrily. “Speak out: aren’t you going?”
    

      “Oh dear,” Volodya wept softly. “How can I go? I feel so
      unhappy about mamma.”
    

      “My pale-face brother, I pray you, let us set off. You declared you
      were going, you egged me on, and now the time comes, you funk it!”
    

      “I . . . I . . . I’m not funking it, but I . . . I . . . I’m
      sorry for mamma.”
    

      “Say once and for all, are you going or are you not?”
    

      “I am going, only . . . wait a little . . . I want to be at home a
      little.”
    

      “In that case I will go by myself,” Lentilov declared. “I
      can get on without you. And you wanted to hunt tigers and fight! Since
      that’s how it is, give me back my cartridges!”
    

      At this Volodya cried so bitterly that his sisters could not help crying
      too. Silence followed.
    

      “So you are not coming?” Lentilov began again.
    

      “I . . . I . . . I am coming!”
    

      “Well, put on your things, then.”
    

      And Lentilov tried to cheer Volodya up by singing the praises of America,
      growling like a tiger, pretending to be a steamer, scolding him, and
      promising to give him all the ivory and lions’ and tigers’
      skins.
    

      And this thin, dark boy, with his freckles and his bristling shock of
      hair, impressed the little girls as an extraordinary remarkable person. He
      was a hero, a determined character, who knew no fear, and he growled so
      ferociously, that, standing at the door, they really might imagine there
      was a tiger or lion inside. When the little girls went back to their room
      and dressed, Katya’s eyes were full of tears, and she said:
    

      “Oh, I feel so frightened!”
    

      Everything was as usual till two o’clock, when they sat down to
      dinner. Then it appeared that the boys were not in the house. They sent to
      the servants’ quarters, to the stables, to the bailiff’s
      cottage. They were not to be found. They sent into the village— they
      were not there.
    

      At tea, too, the boys were still absent, and by supper-time Volodya’s
      mother was dreadfully uneasy, and even shed tears.
    

      Late in the evening they sent again to the village, they searched
      everywhere, and walked along the river bank with lanterns. Heavens! what a
      fuss there was!
    

      Next day the police officer came, and a paper of some sort was written out
      in the dining-room. Their mother cried. . . .
    

      All of a sudden a sledge stopped at the door, with three white horses in a
      cloud of steam.
    

      “Volodya’s come,” someone shouted in the yard.
    

      “Master Volodya’s here!” bawled Natalya, running into
      the dining-room. And Milord barked his deep bass, “bow-wow.”
    

      It seemed that the boys had been stopped in the Arcade, where they had
      gone from shop to shop asking where they could get gunpowder.
    

      Volodya burst into sobs as soon as he came into the hall, and flung
      himself on his mother’s neck. The little girls, trembling, wondered
      with terror what would happen next. They saw their father take Volodya and
      Lentilov into his study, and there he talked to them a long while.
    

      “Is this a proper thing to do?” their father said to them.
      “I only pray they won’t hear of it at school, you would both
      be expelled. You ought to be ashamed, Mr. Lentilov, really. It’s not
      at all the thing to do! You began it, and I hope you will be punished by
      your parents. How could you? Where did you spend the night?”
    

      “At the station,” Lentilov answered proudly.
    

      Then Volodya went to bed, and had a compress, steeped in vinegar, on his
      forehead.
    

      A telegram was sent off, and next day a lady, Lentilov’s mother,
      made her appearance and bore off her son.
    

      Lentilov looked morose and haughty to the end, and he did not utter a
      single word at taking leave of the little girls. But he took Katya’s
      book and wrote in it as a souvenir: “Montehomo, the Hawk’s
      Claw, Chief of the Ever Victorious.”
    











      SHROVE TUESDAY
    

“PAVEL
      VASSILITCH!” cries Pelageya Ivanovna, waking her husband. “Pavel
      Vassilitch! You might go and help Styopa with his lessons, he is sitting
      crying over his book. He can’t understand something again!”
    

      Pavel Vassilitch gets up, makes the sign of the cross over his mouth as he
      yawns, and says softly: “In a minute, my love!”
    

      The cat who has been asleep beside him gets up too, straightens out its
      tail, arches its spine, and half-shuts its eyes. There is stillness. . . .
      Mice can be heard scurrying behind the wall-paper. Putting on his boots
      and his dressing-gown, Pavel Vassilitch, crumpled and frowning from
      sleepiness, comes out of his bedroom into the dining-room; on his entrance
      another cat, engaged in sniffing a marinade of fish in the window, jumps
      down to the floor, and hides behind the cupboard.
    

      “Who asked you to sniff that!” he says angrily, covering the
      fish with a sheet of newspaper. “You are a pig to do that, not a
      cat. . . .”
    

      From the dining-room there is a door leading into the nursery. There, at a
      table covered with stains and deep scratches, sits Styopa, a high-school
      boy in the second class, with a peevish expression of face and
      tear-stained eyes. With his knees raised almost to his chin, and his hands
      clasped round them, he is swaying to and fro like a Chinese idol and
      looking crossly at a sum book.
    

      “Are you working?” asks Pavel Vassilitch, sitting down to the
      table and yawning. “Yes, my boy. . . . We have enjoyed ourselves,
      slept, and eaten pancakes, and to-morrow comes Lenten fare, repentance,
      and going to work. Every period of time has its limits. Why are your eyes
      so red? Are you sick of learning your lessons? To be sure, after pancakes,
      lessons are nasty to swallow. That’s about it.”
    

      “What are you laughing at the child for?” Pelageya Ivanovna
      calls from the next room. “You had better show him instead of
      laughing at him. He’ll get a one again to-morrow, and make me
      miserable.”
    

      “What is it you don’t understand?” Pavel Vassilitch asks
      Styopa.
    

      “Why this . . . division of fractions,” the boy answers
      crossly. “The division of fractions by fractions. . . .”
    

      “H’m . . . queer boy! What is there in it? There’s
      nothing to understand in it. Learn the rules, and that’s all. . . .
      To divide a fraction by a fraction you must multiply the numerator of the
      first fraction by the denominator of the second, and that will be the
      numerator of the quotient. . . . In this case, the numerator of the first
      fraction. . . .”
    

      “I know that without your telling me,” Styopa interrupts him,
      flicking a walnut shell off the table. “Show me the proof.”
    

      “The proof? Very well, give me a pencil. Listen. . . . Suppose we
      want to divide seven eighths by two fifths. Well, the point of it is, my
      boy, that it’s required to divide these fractions by each other. . .
      . Have they set the samovar?”
    

      “I don’t know.”
    

      “It’s time for tea. . . . It’s past seven. Well, now
      listen. We will look at it like this. . . . Suppose we want to divide
      seven eighths not by two fifths but by two, that is, by the numerator
      only. We divide it, what do we get?
    

      “Seven sixteenths.”
    

      “Right. Bravo! Well, the trick of it is, my boy, that if we . . . so
      if we have divided it by two then. . . . Wait a bit, I am getting muddled.
      I remember when I was at school, the teacher of arithmetic was called
      Sigismund Urbanitch, a Pole. He used to get into a muddle over every
      lesson. He would begin explaining some theory, get in a tangle, and turn
      crimson all over and race up and down the class-room as though someone
      were sticking an awl in his back, then he would blow his nose half a dozen
      times and begin to cry. But you know we were magnanimous to him, we
      pretended not to see it. ‘What is it, Sigismund Urbanitch?’ we
      used to ask him. ‘Have you got toothache?’ And what a set of
      young ruffians, regular cut-throats, we were, but yet we were magnanimous,
      you know! There weren’t any boys like you in my day, they were all
      great hulking fellows, great strapping louts, one taller than another. For
      instance, in our third class, there was Mamahin. My goodness, he was a
      solid chap! You know, a regular maypole, seven feet high. When he moved,
      the floor shook; when he brought his great fist down on your back, he
      would knock the breath out of your body! Not only we boys, but even the
      teachers were afraid of him. So this Mamahin used to . . .”
    

      Pelageya Ivanovna’s footsteps are heard through the door. Pavel
      Vassilitch winks towards the door and says:
    

      “There’s mother coming. Let’s get to work. Well, so you
      see, my boy,” he says, raising his voice. “This fraction has
      to be multiplied by that one. Well, and to do that you have to take the
      numerator of the first fraction. . .”
    

      “Come to tea!” cries Pelageya Ivanovna. Pavel Vassilitch and
      his son abandon arithmetic and go in to tea. Pelageya Ivanovna is already
      sitting at the table with an aunt who never speaks, another aunt who is
      deaf and dumb, and Granny Markovna, a midwife who had helped Styopa into
      the world. The samovar is hissing and puffing out steam which throws
      flickering shadows on the ceiling. The cats come in from the entry sleepy
      and melancholy with their tails in the air. . . .
    

      “Have some jam with your tea, Markovna,” says Pelageya
      Ivanovna, addressing the midwife. “To-morrow the great fast begins.
      Eat well to-day.”
    

      Markovna takes a heaped spoonful of jam hesitatingly as though it were a
      powder, raises it to her lips, and with a sidelong look at Pavel
      Vassilitch, eats it; at once her face is overspread with a sweet smile, as
      sweet as the jam itself.
    

      “The jam is particularly good,” she says. “Did you make
      it yourself, Pelageya Ivanovna, ma’am?”
    

      “Yes. Who else is there to do it? I do everything myself.
      Styopotchka, have I given you your tea too weak? Ah, you have drunk it
      already. Pass your cup, my angel; let me give you some more.”
    

      “So this Mamahin, my boy, could not bear the French master,”
      Pavel Vassilitch goes on, addressing his son. “‘I am a
      nobleman,’ he used to shout, ‘and I won’t allow a
      Frenchman to lord it over me! We beat the French in 1812!’ Well, of
      course they used to thrash him for it . . . thrash him dre-ead-fully, and
      sometimes when he saw they were meaning to thrash him, he would jump out
      of window, and off he would go! Then for five or six days afterwards he
      would not show himself at the school. His mother would come to the
      head-master and beg him for God’s sake: ‘Be so kind, sir, as
      to find my Mishka, and flog him, the rascal!’ And the head-master
      would say to her: ‘Upon my word, madam, our five porters aren’t
      a match for him!’”
    

      “Good heavens, to think of such ruffians being born,” whispers
      Pelageya Ivanovna, looking at her husband in horror. “What a trial
      for the poor mother!”
    

      A silence follows. Styopa yawns loudly, and scrutinises the Chinaman on
      the tea-caddy whom he has seen a thousand times already. Markovna and the
      two aunts sip tea carefully out of their saucers. The air is still and
      stifling from the stove. . . . Faces and gestures betray the sloth and
      repletion that comes when the stomach is full, and yet one must go on
      eating. The samovar, the cups, and the table-cloth are cleared away, but
      still the family sits on at the table. . . . Pelageya Ivanovna is
      continually jumping up and, with an expression of alarm on her face,
      running off into the kitchen, to talk to the cook about the supper. The
      two aunts go on sitting in the same position immovably, with their arms
      folded across their bosoms and doze, staring with their pewtery little
      eyes at the lamp. Markovna hiccups every minute and asks:
    

      “Why is it I have the hiccups? I don’t think I have eaten
      anything to account for it . . . nor drunk anything either. . . . Hic!”
    

      Pavel Vassilitch and Styopa sit side by side, with their heads touching,
      and, bending over the table, examine a volume of the “Neva”
      for 1878.
    

      “‘The monument of Leonardo da Vinci, facing the gallery of
      Victor Emmanuel at Milan.’ I say! . . . After the style of a
      triumphal arch. . . . A cavalier with his lady. . . . And there are little
      men in the distance. . . .”
    

      “That little man is like a schoolfellow of mine called Niskubin,”
      says Styopa.
    

      “Turn over. . . . ‘The proboscis of the common house-fly seen
      under the microscope.’ So that’s a proboscis! I say—a
      fly. Whatever would a bug look like under a microscope, my boy? Wouldn’t
      it be horrid!”
    

      The old-fashioned clock in the drawing-room does not strike, but coughs
      ten times huskily as though it had a cold. The cook, Anna, comes into the
      dining-room, and plumps down at the master’s feet.
    

      “Forgive me, for Christ’s sake, Pavel Vassilitch!” she
      says, getting up, flushed all over.
    

      “You forgive me, too, for Christ’s sake,” Pavel
      Vassilitch responds unconcernedly.
    

      In the same manner, Anna goes up to the other members of the family,
      plumps down at their feet, and begs forgiveness. She only misses out
      Markovna to whom, not being one of the gentry, she does not feel it
      necessary to bow down.
    

      Another half-hour passes in stillness and tranquillity. The “Neva”
      is by now lying on the sofa, and Pavel Vassilitch, holding up his finger,
      repeats by heart some Latin verses he has learned in his childhood. Styopa
      stares at the finger with the wedding ring, listens to the unintelligible
      words, and dozes; he rubs his eyelids with his fists, and they shut all
      the tighter.
    

      “I am going to bed . . .” he says, stretching and yawning.
    

      “What, to bed?” says Pelageya Ivanovna. “What about
      supper before the fast?”
    

      “I don’t want any.”
    

      “Are you crazy?” says his mother in alarm. “How can you
      go without your supper before the fast? You’ll have nothing but
      Lenten food all through the fast!”
    

      Pavel Vassilitch is scared too.
    

      “Yes, yes, my boy,” he says. “For seven weeks mother
      will give you nothing but Lenten food. You can’t miss the last
      supper before the fast.”
    

      “Oh dear, I am sleepy,” says Styopa peevishly.
    

      “Since that is how it is, lay the supper quickly,” Pavel
      Vassilitch cries in a fluster. “Anna, why are you sitting there,
      silly? Make haste and lay the table.”
    

      Pelageya Ivanovna clasps her hands and runs into the kitchen with an
      expression as though the house were on fire.
    

      “Make haste, make haste,” is heard all over the house. “Styopotchka
      is sleepy. Anna! Oh dear me, what is one to do? Make haste.”
    

      Five minutes later the table is laid. Again the cats, arching their
      spines, and stretching themselves with their tails in the air, come into
      the dining-room. . . . The family begin supper. . . . No one is hungry,
      everyone’s stomach is overfull, but yet they must eat.
    











      THE OLD HOUSE
    

(A Story told by a Houseowner)


THE old house had
      to be pulled down that a new one might be built in its place. I led the
      architect through the empty rooms, and between our business talk told him
      various stories. The tattered wallpapers, the dingy windows, the dark
      stoves, all bore the traces of recent habitation and evoked memories. On
      that staircase, for instance, drunken men were once carrying down a dead
      body when they stumbled and flew headlong downstairs together with the
      coffin; the living were badly bruised, while the dead man looked very
      serious, as though nothing had happened, and shook his head when they
      lifted him up from the ground and put him back in the coffin. You see
      those three doors in a row: in there lived young ladies who were always
      receiving visitors, and so were better dressed than any other lodgers, and
      could pay their rent regularly. The door at the end of the corridor leads
      to the wash-house, where by day they washed clothes and at night made an
      uproar and drank beer. And in that flat of three rooms everything is
      saturated with bacteria and bacilli. It’s not nice there. Many
      lodgers have died there, and I can positively assert that that flat was at
      some time cursed by someone, and that together with its human lodgers
      there was always another lodger, unseen, living in it. I remember
      particularly the fate of one family. Picture to yourself an ordinary man,
      not remarkable in any way, with a wife, a mother, and four children. His
      name was Putohin; he was a copying clerk at a notary’s, and received
      thirty-five roubles a month. He was a sober, religious, serious man. When
      he brought me his rent for the flat he always apologised for being badly
      dressed; apologised for being five days late, and when I gave him a
      receipt he would smile good-humouredly and say: “Oh yes, there’s
      that too, I don’t like those receipts.” He lived poorly but
      decently. In that middle room, the grandmother used to be with the four
      children; there they used to cook, sleep, receive their visitors, and even
      dance. This was Putohin’s own room; he had a table in it, at which
      he used to work doing private jobs, copying parts for the theatre,
      advertisements, and so on. This room on the right was let to his lodger,
      Yegoritch, a locksmith—a steady fellow, but given to drink; he was
      always too hot, and so used to go about in his waistcoat and barefoot.
      Yegoritch used to mend locks, pistols, children’s bicycles, would
      not refuse to mend cheap clocks and make skates for a quarter-rouble, but
      he despised that work, and looked on himself as a specialist in musical
      instruments. Amongst the litter of steel and iron on his table there was
      always to be seen a concertina with a broken key, or a trumpet with its
      sides bent in. He paid Putohin two and a half roubles for his room; he was
      always at his work-table, and only came out to thrust some piece of iron
      into the stove.
    

      On the rare occasions when I went into that flat in the evening, this was
      always the picture I came upon: Putohin would be sitting at his little
      table, copying something; his mother and his wife, a thin woman with an
      exhausted-looking face, were sitting near the lamp, sewing; Yegoritch
      would be making a rasping sound with his file. And the hot, still
      smouldering embers in the stove filled the room with heat and fumes; the
      heavy air smelt of cabbage soup, swaddling-clothes, and Yegoritch. It was
      poor and stuffy, but the working-class faces, the children’s little
      drawers hung up along by the stove, Yegoritch’s bits of iron had yet
      an air of peace, friendliness, content. . . . In the corridor outside the
      children raced about with well-combed heads, merry and profoundly
      convinced that everything was satisfactory in this world, and would be so
      endlessly, that one had only to say one’s prayers every morning and
      at bedtime.
    

      Now imagine in the midst of that same room, two paces from the stove, the
      coffin in which Putohin’s wife is lying. There is no husband whose
      wife will live for ever, but there was something special about this death.
      When, during the requiem service, I glanced at the husband’s grave
      face, at his stern eyes, I thought: “Oho, brother!”
    

      It seemed to me that he himself, his children, the grandmother and
      Yegoritch, were already marked down by that unseen being which lived with
      them in that flat. I am a thoroughly superstitious man, perhaps, because I
      am a houseowner and for forty years have had to do with lodgers. I believe
      if you don’t win at cards from the beginning you will go on losing
      to the end; when fate wants to wipe you and your family off the face of
      the earth, it remains inexorable in its persecution, and the first
      misfortune is commonly only the first of a long series. . . . Misfortunes
      are like stones. One stone has only to drop from a high cliff for others
      to be set rolling after it. In short, as I came away from the requiem
      service at Putohin’s, I believed that he and his family were in a
      bad way.
    

      And, in fact, a week afterwards the notary quite unexpectedly dismissed
      Putohin, and engaged a young lady in his place. And would you believe it,
      Putohin was not so much put out at the loss of his job as at being
      superseded by a young lady and not by a man. Why a young lady? He so
      resented this that on his return home he thrashed his children, swore at
      his mother, and got drunk. Yegoritch got drunk, too, to keep him company.
    

      Putohin brought me the rent, but did not apologise this time, though it
      was eighteen days overdue, and said nothing when he took the receipt from
      me. The following month the rent was brought by his mother; she only
      brought me half, and promised to bring the remainder a week later. The
      third month, I did not get a farthing, and the porter complained to me
      that the lodgers in No. 23 were “not behaving like gentlemen.”
    

      These were ominous symptoms.
    

      Picture this scene. A sombre Petersburg morning looks in at the dingy
      windows. By the stove, the granny is pouring out the children’s tea.
      Only the eldest, Vassya, drinks out of a glass, for the others the tea is
      poured out into saucers. Yegoritch is squatting on his heels before the
      stove, thrusting a bit of iron into the fire. His head is heavy and his
      eyes are lustreless from yesterday’s drinking-bout; he sighs and
      groans, trembles and coughs.
    

      “He has quite put me off the right way, the devil,” he
      grumbles; “he drinks himself and leads others into sin.”
    

      Putohin sits in his room, on the bedstead from which the bedclothes and
      the pillows have long ago disappeared, and with his hands straying in his
      hair looks blankly at the floor at his feet. He is tattered, unkempt, and
      ill.
    

      “Drink it up, make haste or you will be late for school,” the
      old woman urges on Vassya, “and it’s time for me, too, to go
      and scrub the floors for the Jews. . . .”
    

      The old woman is the only one in the flat who does not lose heart. She
      thinks of old times, and goes out to hard dirty work. On Fridays she
      scrubs the floors for the Jews at the crockery shop, on Saturdays she goes
      out washing for shopkeepers, and on Sundays she is racing about the town
      from morning to night, trying to find ladies who will help her. Every day
      she has work of some sort; she washes and scrubs, and is by turns a
      midwife, a matchmaker, or a beggar. It is true she, too, is not
      disinclined to drown her sorrows, but even when she has had a drop she
      does not forget her duties. In Russia there are many such tough old women,
      and how much of its welfare rests upon them!
    

      When he has finished his tea, Vassya packs up his books in a satchel and
      goes behind the stove; his greatcoat ought to be hanging there beside his
      granny’s clothes. A minute later he comes out from behind the stove
      and asks:
    

      “Where is my greatcoat?”
    

      The grandmother and the other children look for the greatcoat together,
      they waste a long time in looking for it, but the greatcoat has utterly
      vanished. Where is it? The grandmother and Vassya are pale and frightened.
      Even Yegoritch is surprised. Putohin is the only one who does not move.
      Though he is quick to notice anything irregular or disorderly, this time
      he makes a pretence of hearing and seeing nothing. That is suspicious.
    

      “He’s sold it for drink,” Yegoritch declares.
    

      Putohin says nothing, so it is the truth. Vassya is overcome with horror.
      His greatcoat, his splendid greatcoat, made of his dead mother’s
      cloth dress, with a splendid calico lining, gone for drink at the tavern!
      And with the greatcoat is gone too, of course, the blue pencil that lay in
      the pocket, and the note-book with “Nota bene” in gold
      letters on it! There’s another pencil with india-rubber stuck into
      the note-book, and, besides that, there are transfer pictures lying in it.
    

      Vassya would like to cry, but to cry is impossible. If his father, who has
      a headache, heard crying he would shout, stamp with his feet, and begin
      fighting, and after drinking he fights horribly. Granny would stand up for
      Vassya, and his father would strike granny too; it would end in Yegoritch
      getting mixed up in it too, clutching at his father and falling on the
      floor with him. The two would roll on the floor, struggling together and
      gasping with drunken animal fury, and granny would cry, the children would
      scream, the neighbours would send for the porter. No, better not cry.
    

      Because he mustn’t cry, or give vent to his indignation aloud,
      Vassya moans, wrings his hands and moves his legs convulsively, or biting
      his sleeve shakes it with his teeth as a dog does a hare. His eyes are
      frantic, and his face is distorted with despair. Looking at him, his
      granny all at once takes the shawl off her head, and she too makes queer
      movements with her arms and legs in silence, with her eyes fixed on a
      point in the distance. And at that moment I believe there is a definite
      certainty in the minds of the boy and the old woman that their life is
      ruined, that there is no hope. . . .
    

      Putohin hears no crying, but he can see it all from his room. When, half
      an hour later, Vassya sets off to school, wrapped in his grandmother’s
      shawl, he goes out with a face I will not undertake to describe, and walks
      after him. He longs to call the boy, to comfort him, to beg his
      forgiveness, to promise him on his word of honour, to call his dead mother
      to witness, but instead of words, sobs break from him. It is a grey, cold
      morning. When he reaches the town school Vassya untwists his granny’s
      shawl, and goes into the school with nothing over his jacket for fear the
      boys should say he looks like a woman. And when he gets home Putohin sobs,
      mutters some incoherent words, bows down to the ground before his mother
      and Yegoritch, and the locksmith’s table. Then, recovering himself a
      little, he runs to me and begs me breathlessly, for God’s sake, to
      find him some job. I give him hopes, of course.
    

      “At last I am myself again,” he said. “It’s high
      time, indeed, to come to my senses. I’ve made a beast of myself, and
      now it’s over.”
    

      He is delighted and thanks me, while I, who have studied these gentry
      thoroughly during the years I have owned the house, look at him, and am
      tempted to say:
    

      “It’s too late, dear fellow! You are a dead man already.”
    

      From me, Putohin runs to the town school. There he paces up and down,
      waiting till his boy comes out.
    

      “I say, Vassya,” he says joyfully, when the boy at last comes
      out, “I have just been promised a job. Wait a bit, I will buy you a
      splendid fur-coat. . . . I’ll send you to the high school! Do you
      understand? To the high school! I’ll make a gentleman of you! And I
      won’t drink any more. On my honour I won’t.”
    

      And he has intense faith in the bright future. But the evening comes on.
      The old woman, coming back from the Jews with twenty kopecks, exhausted
      and aching all over, sets to work to wash the children’s clothes.
      Vassya is sitting doing a sum. Yegoritch is not working. Thanks to Putohin
      he has got into the way of drinking, and is feeling at the moment an
      overwhelming desire for drink. It’s hot and stuffy in the room.
      Steam rises in clouds from the tub where the old woman is washing.
    

      “Are we going?” Yegoritch asks surlily.
    

      My lodger does not answer. After his excitement he feels insufferably
      dreary. He struggles with the desire to drink, with acute depression and .
      . . and, of course, depression gets the best of it. It is a familiar
      story.
    

      Towards night, Yegoritch and Putohin go out, and in the morning Vassya
      cannot find granny’s shawl.
    

      That is the drama that took place in that flat. After selling the shawl
      for drink, Putohin did not come home again. Where he disappeared to I don’t
      know. After he disappeared, the old woman first got drunk, then took to
      her bed. She was taken to the hospital, the younger children were fetched
      by relations of some sort, and Vassya went into the wash-house here. In
      the day-time he handed the irons, and at night fetched the beer. When he
      was turned out of the wash-house he went into the service of one of the
      young ladies, used to run about at night on errands of some sort, and
      began to be spoken of as “a dangerous customer.”
    

      What has happened to him since I don’t know.
    

      And in this room here a street musician lived for ten years. When he died
      they found twenty thousand roubles in his feather bed.
    











      IN PASSION WEEK
    

“Go along,
      they are ringing already; and mind, don’t be naughty in church or
      God will punish you.”
    

      My mother thrusts a few copper coins upon me, and, instantly forgetting
      about me, runs into the kitchen with an iron that needs reheating. I know
      well that after confession I shall not be allowed to eat or drink, and so,
      before leaving the house, I force myself to eat a crust of white bread,
      and to drink two glasses of water. It is quite spring in the street. The
      roads are all covered with brownish slush, in which future paths are
      already beginning to show; the roofs and side-walks are dry; the fresh
      young green is piercing through the rotting grass of last year, under the
      fences. In the gutters there is the merry gurgling and foaming of dirty
      water, in which the sunbeams do not disdain to bathe. Chips, straws, the
      husks of sunflower seeds are carried rapidly along in the water, whirling
      round and sticking in the dirty foam. Where, where are those chips
      swimming to? It may well be that from the gutter they may pass into the
      river, from the river into the sea, and from the sea into the ocean. I try
      to imagine to myself that long terrible journey, but my fancy stops short
      before reaching the sea.
    

      A cabman drives by. He clicks to his horse, tugs at the reins, and does
      not see that two street urchins are hanging on the back of his cab. I
      should like to join them, but think of confession, and the street urchins
      begin to seem to me great sinners.
    

      “They will be asked on the day of judgment: ‘Why did you play
      pranks and deceive the poor cabman?’” I think. “They
      will begin to defend themselves, but evil spirits will seize them, and
      drag them to fire everlasting. But if they obey their parents, and give
      the beggars a kopeck each, or a roll, God will have pity on them, and will
      let them into Paradise.”
    

      The church porch is dry and bathed in sunshine. There is not a soul in it.
      I open the door irresolutely and go into the church. Here, in the twilight
      which seems to me thick and gloomy as at no other time, I am overcome by
      the sense of sinfulness and insignificance. What strikes the eye first of
      all is a huge crucifix, and on one side of it the Mother of God, and on
      the other, St. John the Divine. The candelabra and the candlestands are
      draped in black mourning covers, the lamps glimmer dimly and faintly, and
      the sun seems intentionally to pass by the church windows. The Mother of
      God and the beloved disciple of Jesus Christ, depicted in profile, gaze in
      silence at the insufferable agony and do not observe my presence; I feel
      that to them I am alien, superfluous, unnoticed, that I can be no help to
      them by word or deed, that I am a loathsome, dishonest boy, only capable
      of mischief, rudeness, and tale-bearing. I think of all the people I know,
      and they all seem to me petty, stupid, and wicked, and incapable of
      bringing one drop of relief to that intolerable sorrow which I now behold.
    

      The twilight of the church grows darker and more gloomy. And the Mother of
      God and St. John look lonely and forlorn to me.
    

      Prokofy Ignatitch, a veteran soldier, the church verger’s assistant,
      is standing behind the candle cupboard. Raising his eyebrows and stroking
      his beard he explains in a half-whisper to an old woman: “Matins
      will be in the evening to-day, directly after vespers. And they will ring
      for the ‘hours’ to-morrow between seven and eight. Do you
      understand? Between seven and eight.”
    

      Between the two broad columns on the right, where the chapel of Varvara
      the Martyr begins, those who are going to confess stand beside the screen,
      awaiting their turn. And Mitka is there too— a ragged boy with his
      head hideously cropped, with ears that jut out, and little spiteful eyes.
      He is the son of Nastasya the charwoman, and is a bully and a ruffian who
      snatches apples from the women’s baskets, and has more than once
      carried off my knuckle-bones. He looks at me angrily, and I fancy takes a
      spiteful pleasure in the fact that he, not I, will first go behind the
      screen. I feel boiling over with resentment, I try not to look at him,
      and, at the bottom of my heart, I am vexed that this wretched boy’s
      sins will soon be forgiven.
    

      In front of him stands a grandly dressed, beautiful lady, wearing a hat
      with a white feather. She is noticeably agitated, is waiting in strained
      suspense, and one of her cheeks is flushed red with excitement.
    

      I wait for five minutes, for ten. . . . A well-dressed young man with a
      long thin neck, and rubber goloshes, comes out from behind the screen. I
      begin dreaming how, when I am grown up, I will buy goloshes exactly like
      them. I certainly will! The lady shudders and goes behind the screen. It
      is her turn.
    

      In the crack, between the two panels of the screen, I can see the lady go
      up to the lectern and bow down to the ground, then get up, and, without
      looking at the priest, bow her head in anticipation. The priest stands
      with his back to the screen, and so I can only see his grey curly head,
      the chain of the cross on his chest, and his broad back. His face is not
      visible. Heaving a sigh, and not looking at the lady, he begins speaking
      rapidly, shaking his head, alternately raising and dropping his whispering
      voice. The lady listens meekly as though conscious of guilt, answers
      meekly, and looks at the floor.
    

      “In what way can she be sinful?” I wonder, looking reverently
      at her gentle, beautiful face. “God forgive her sins, God send her
      happiness.” But now the priest covers her head with the stole.
      “And I, unworthy priest . . .” I hear his voice, “. . .
      by His power given unto me, do forgive and absolve thee from all thy sins.
      . . .”
    

      The lady bows down to the ground, kisses the cross, and comes back. Both
      her cheeks are flushed now, but her face is calm and serene and cheerful.
    

      “She is happy now,” I think to myself, looking first at her
      and then at the priest who had forgiven her sins. “But how happy the
      man must be who has the right to forgive sins!”
    

      Now it is Mitka’s turn, but a feeling of hatred for that young
      ruffian suddenly boils up in me. I want to go behind the screen before
      him, I want to be the first. Noticing my movement he hits me on the head
      with his candle, I respond by doing the same, and, for half a minute,
      there is a sound of panting, and, as it were, of someone breaking candles.
      . . . We are separated. My foe goes timidly up to the lectern, and bows
      down to the floor without bending his knees, but I do not see what happens
      after that; the thought that my turn is coming after Mitka’s makes
      everything grow blurred and confused before my eyes; Mitka’s
      protruding ears grow large, and melt into his dark head, the priest sways,
      the floor seems to be undulating. . . .
    

      The priest’s voice is audible: “And I, unworthy priest . . .”
    

      Now I too move behind the screen. I do not feel the ground under my feet,
      it is as though I were walking on air. . . . I go up to the lectern which
      is taller than I am. For a minute I have a glimpse of the indifferent,
      exhausted face of the priest. But after that I see nothing but his sleeve
      with its blue lining, the cross, and the edge of the lectern. I am
      conscious of the close proximity of the priest, the smell of his cassock;
      I hear his stern voice, and my cheek turned towards him begins to burn. .
      . . I am so troubled that I miss a great deal that he says, but I answer
      his questions sincerely in an unnatural voice, not my own. I think of the
      forlorn figures of the Holy Mother and St. John the Divine, the crucifix,
      my mother, and I want to cry and beg forgiveness.
    

      “What is your name?” the priest asks me, covering my head with
      the soft stole.
    

      How light-hearted I am now, with joy in my soul!
    

      I have no sins now, I am holy, I have the right to enter Paradise! I fancy
      that I already smell like the cassock. I go from behind the screen to the
      deacon to enter my name, and sniff at my sleeves. The dusk of the church
      no longer seems gloomy, and I look indifferently, without malice, at
      Mitka.
    

      “What is your name?” the deacon asks.
    

      “Fedya.”
    

      “And your name from your father?”
    

      “I don’t know.”
    

      “What is your papa’s name?”
    

      “Ivan Petrovitch.”
    

      “And your surname?”
    

      I make no answer.
    

      “How old are you?”
    

      “Nearly nine.”
    

      When I get home I go to bed quickly, that I may not see them eating
      supper; and, shutting my eyes, dream of how fine it would be to endure
      martyrdom at the hands of some Herod or Dioskorus, to live in the desert,
      and, like St. Serafim, feed the bears, live in a cell, and eat nothing but
      holy bread, give my property to the poor, go on a pilgrimage to Kiev. I
      hear them laying the table in the dining-room—they are going to have
      supper, they will eat salad, cabbage pies, fried and baked fish. How
      hungry I am! I would consent to endure any martyrdom, to live in the
      desert without my mother, to feed bears out of my own hands, if only I
      might first eat just one cabbage pie!
    

      “Lord, purify me a sinner,” I pray, covering my head over.
      “Guardian angel, save me from the unclean spirit.”
    

      The next day, Thursday, I wake up with my heart as pure and clean as a
      fine spring day. I go gaily and boldly into the church, feeling that I am
      a communicant, that I have a splendid and expensive shirt on, made out of
      a silk dress left by my grandmother. In the church everything has an air
      of joy, happiness, and spring. The faces of the Mother of God and St. John
      the Divine are not so sorrowful as yesterday. The faces of the
      communicants are radiant with hope, and it seems as though all the past is
      forgotten, all is forgiven. Mitka, too, has combed his hair, and is
      dressed in his best. I look gaily at his protruding ears, and to show that
      I have nothing against him, I say:
    

      “You look nice to-day, and if your hair did not stand up so, and you
      weren’t so poorly dressed, everybody would think that your mother
      was not a washerwoman but a lady. Come to me at Easter, we will play
      knuckle-bones.”
    

      Mitka looks at me mistrustfully, and shakes his fist at me on the sly.
    

      And the lady I saw yesterday looks lovely. She is wearing a light blue
      dress, and a big sparkling brooch in the shape of a horse-shoe. I admire
      her, and think that, when I am grown-up, I will certainly marry a woman
      like that, but remembering that getting married is shameful, I leave off
      thinking about it, and go into the choir where the deacon is already
      reading the “hours.”
    











      WHITEBROW
    

A HUNGRY she-wolf
      got up to go hunting. Her cubs, all three of them, were sound asleep,
      huddled in a heap and keeping each other warm. She licked them and went
      off.
    

      It was already March, a month of spring, but at night the trees snapped
      with the cold, as they do in December, and one could hardly put one’s
      tongue out without its being nipped. The wolf-mother was in delicate
      health and nervous; she started at the slightest sound, and kept hoping
      that no one would hurt the little ones at home while she was away. The
      smell of the tracks of men and horses, logs, piles of faggots, and the
      dark road with horse-dung on it frightened her; it seemed to her that men
      were standing behind the trees in the darkness, and that dogs were howling
      somewhere beyond the forest.
    

      She was no longer young and her scent had grown feebler, so that it
      sometimes happened that she took the track of a fox for that of a dog, and
      even at times lost her way, a thing that had never been in her youth.
      Owing to the weakness of her health she no longer hunted calves and big
      sheep as she had in old days, and kept her distance now from mares with
      colts; she fed on nothing but carrion; fresh meat she tasted very rarely,
      only in the spring when she would come upon a hare and take away her
      young, or make her way into a peasant’s stall where there were
      lambs.
    

      Some three miles from her lair there stood a winter hut on the posting
      road. There lived the keeper Ignat, an old man of seventy, who was always
      coughing and talking to himself; at night he was usually asleep, and by
      day he wandered about the forest with a single-barrelled gun, whistling to
      the hares. He must have worked among machinery in early days, for before
      he stood still he always shouted to himself: “Stop the machine!”
      and before going on: “Full speed!” He had a huge black dog of
      indeterminate breed, called Arapka. When it ran too far ahead he used to
      shout to it: “Reverse action!” Sometimes he used to sing, and
      as he did so staggered violently, and often fell down (the wolf thought
      the wind blew him over), and shouted: “Run off the rails!”
    

      The wolf remembered that, in the summer and autumn, a ram and two ewes
      were pasturing near the winter hut, and when she had run by not so long
      ago she fancied that she had heard bleating in the stall. And now, as she
      got near the place, she reflected that it was already March, and, by that
      time, there would certainly be lambs in the stall. She was tormented by
      hunger, she thought with what greediness she would eat a lamb, and these
      thoughts made her teeth snap, and her eyes glitter in the darkness like
      two sparks of light.
    

      Ignat’s hut, his barn, cattle-stall, and well were surrounded by
      high snowdrifts. All was still. Arapka was, most likely, asleep in the
      barn.
    

      The wolf clambered over a snowdrift on to the stall, and began scratching
      away the thatched roof with her paws and her nose. The straw was rotten
      and decaying, so that the wolf almost fell through; all at once a smell of
      warm steam, of manure, and of sheep’s milk floated straight to her
      nostrils. Down below, a lamb, feeling the cold, bleated softly. Leaping
      through the hole, the wolf fell with her four paws and chest on something
      soft and warm, probably a sheep, and at the same moment, something in the
      stall suddenly began whining, barking, and going off into a shrill little
      yap; the sheep huddled against the wall, and the wolf, frightened,
      snatched the first thing her teeth fastened on, and dashed away. . . .
    

      She ran at her utmost speed, while Arapka, who by now had scented the
      wolf, howled furiously, the frightened hens cackled, and Ignat, coming out
      into the porch, shouted: “Full speed! Blow the whistle!”
    

      And he whistled like a steam-engine, and then shouted: “Ho-ho-ho-ho!”
      and all this noise was repeated by the forest echo. When, little by
      little, it all died away, the wolf somewhat recovered herself, and began
      to notice that the prey she held in her teeth and dragged along the snow
      was heavier and, as it were, harder than lambs usually were at that
      season; and it smelt somehow different, and uttered strange sounds. . . .
      The wolf stopped and laid her burden on the snow, to rest and begin eating
      it, then all at once she leapt back in disgust. It was not a lamb, but a
      black puppy, with a big head and long legs, of a large breed, with a white
      patch on his brow, like Arapka’s. Judging from his manners he was a
      simple, ignorant, yard-dog. He licked his crushed and wounded back, and,
      as though nothing was the matter, wagged his tail and barked at the wolf.
      She growled like a dog, and ran away from him. He ran after her. She
      looked round and snapped her teeth. He stopped in perplexity, and,
      probably deciding that she was playing with him, craned his head in the
      direction he had come from, and went off into a shrill, gleeful bark, as
      though inviting his mother Arapka to play with him and the wolf.
    

      It was already getting light, and when the wolf reached her home in the
      thick aspen wood, each aspen tree could be seen distinctly, and the
      woodcocks were already awake, and the beautiful male birds often flew up,
      disturbed by the incautious gambols and barking of the puppy.
    

      “Why does he run after me?” thought the wolf with annoyance.
      “I suppose he wants me to eat him.”
    

      She lived with her cubs in a shallow hole; three years before, a tall old
      pine tree had been torn up by the roots in a violent storm, and the hole
      had been formed by it. Now there were dead leaves and moss at the bottom,
      and around it lay bones and bullocks’ horns, with which the little
      ones played. They were by now awake, and all three of them, very much
      alike, were standing in a row at the edge of their hole, looking at their
      returning mother, and wagging their tails. Seeing them, the puppy stopped
      a little way off, and stared at them for a very long time; seeing that
      they, too, were looking very attentively at him, he began barking angrily,
      as at strangers.
    

      By now it was daylight and the sun had risen, the snow sparkled all
      around, but still the puppy stood a little way off and barked. The cubs
      sucked their mother, pressing her thin belly with their paws, while she
      gnawed a horse’s bone, dry and white; she was tormented by hunger,
      her head ached from the dog’s barking, and she felt inclined to fall
      on the uninvited guest and tear him to pieces.
    

      At last the puppy was hoarse and exhausted; seeing they were not afraid of
      him, and not even attending to him, he began somewhat timidly approaching
      the cubs, alternately squatting down and bounding a few steps forward.
      Now, by daylight, it was easy to have a good look at him. . . . His white
      forehead was big, and on it was a hump such as is only seen on very stupid
      dogs; he had little, blue, dingy-looking eyes, and the expression of his
      whole face was extremely stupid. When he reached the cubs he stretched out
      his broad paws, laid his head upon them, and began:
    

      “Mnya, myna . . . nga—nga—nga . . . !”
    

      The cubs did not understand what he meant, but they wagged their tails.
      Then the puppy gave one of the cubs a smack on its big head with his paw.
      The cub, too, gave him a smack on the head. The puppy stood sideways to
      him, and looked at him askance, wagging his tail, then dashed off, and ran
      round several times on the frozen snow. The cubs ran after him, he fell on
      his back and kicked up his legs, and all three of them fell upon him,
      squealing with delight, and began biting him, not to hurt but in play. The
      crows sat on the high pine tree, and looked down on their struggle, and
      were much troubled by it. They grew noisy and merry. The sun was hot, as
      though it were spring; and the woodcocks, continually flitting through the
      pine tree that had been blown down by the storm, looked as though made of
      emerald in the brilliant sunshine.
    

      As a rule, wolf-mothers train their children to hunt by giving them prey
      to play with; and now watching the cubs chasing the puppy over the frozen
      snow and struggling with him, the mother thought:
    

      “Let them learn.”
    

      When they had played long enough, the cubs went into the hole and lay down
      to sleep. The puppy howled a little from hunger, then he, too, stretched
      out in the sunshine. And when they woke up they began playing again.
    

      All day long, and in the evening, the wolf-mother was thinking how the
      lamb had bleated in the cattle-shed the night before, and how it had smelt
      of sheep’s milk, and she kept snapping her teeth from hunger, and
      never left off greedily gnawing the old bone, pretending to herself that
      it was the lamb. The cubs sucked their mother, and the puppy, who was
      hungry, ran round them and sniffed at the snow.
    

      “I’ll eat him . . .” the mother-wolf decided.
    

      She went up to him, and he licked her nose and yapped at her, thinking
      that she wanted to play with him. In the past she had eaten dogs, but the
      dog smelt very doggy, and in the delicate state of her health she could
      not endure the smell; she felt disgusted and walked away. . . .
    

      Towards night it grew cold. The puppy felt depressed and went home.
    

      When the wolf-cubs were fast asleep, their mother went out hunting again.
      As on the previous night she was alarmed at every sound, and she was
      frightened by the stumps, the logs, the dark juniper bushes, which stood
      out singly, and in the distance were like human beings. She ran on the
      ice-covered snow, keeping away from the road. . . . All at once she caught
      a glimpse of something dark, far away on the road. She strained her eyes
      and ears: yes, something really was walking on in front, she could even
      hear the regular thud of footsteps. Surely not a badger? Cautiously
      holding her breath, and keeping always to one side, she overtook the dark
      patch, looked round, and recognised it. It was the puppy with the white
      brow, going with a slow, lingering step homewards.
    

      “If only he doesn’t hinder me again,” thought the wolf,
      and ran quickly on ahead.
    

      But the homestead was by now near. Again she clambered on to the
      cattle-shed by the snowdrift. The gap she had made yesterday had been
      already mended with straw, and two new rafters stretched across the roof.
      The wolf began rapidly working with her legs and nose, looking round to
      see whether the puppy were coming, but the smell of the warm steam and
      manure had hardly reached her nose before she heard a gleeful burst of
      barking behind her. It was the puppy. He leapt up to the wolf on the roof,
      then into the hole, and, feeling himself at home in the warmth,
      recognising his sheep, he barked louder than ever. . . . Arapka woke up in
      the barn, and, scenting a wolf, howled, the hens began cackling, and by
      the time Ignat appeared in the porch with his single-barrelled gun the
      frightened wolf was already far away.
    

      “Fuite!” whistled Ignat. “Fuite! Full steam ahead!”
    

      He pulled the trigger—the gun missed fire; he pulled the trigger
      again—again it missed fire; he tried a third time—and a great
      blaze of flame flew out of the barrel and there was a deafening boom,
      boom. It kicked him violently on the shoulder, and, taking his gun in one
      hand and his axe in the other, he went to see what the noise was about.
    

      A little later he went back to the hut.
    

      “What was it?” a pilgrim, who was staying the night at the hut
      and had been awakened by the noise, asked in a husky voice.
    

      “It’s all right,” answered Ignat. “Nothing of
      consequence. Our Whitebrow has taken to sleeping with the sheep in the
      warm. Only he hasn’t the sense to go in at the door, but always
      tries to wriggle in by the roof. The other night he tore a hole in the
      roof and went off on the spree, the rascal, and now he has come back and
      scratched away the roof again.”
    

      “Stupid dog.”
    

      “Yes, there is a spring snapped in his brain. I do detest fools,”
      sighed Ignat, clambering on to the stove. “Come, man of God, it’s
      early yet to get up. Let us sleep full steam! . . .”
    

      In the morning he called Whitebrow, smacked him hard about the ears, and
      then showing him a stick, kept repeating to him:
    

      “Go in at the door! Go in at the door! Go in at the door!”
    











      KASHTANKA
    

(A Story)


      I
    

      |Misbehaviour


      A YOUNG dog, a reddish mongrel, between a dachshund and a “yard-dog,”
      very like a fox in face, was running up and down the pavement looking
      uneasily from side to side. From time to time she stopped and, whining and
      lifting first one chilled paw and then another, tried to make up her mind
      how it could have happened that she was lost.
    

      She remembered very well how she had passed the day, and how, in the end,
      she had found herself on this unfamiliar pavement.
    

      The day had begun by her master Luka Alexandritch’s putting on his
      hat, taking something wooden under his arm wrapped up in a red
      handkerchief, and calling: “Kashtanka, come along!”
    

      Hearing her name the mongrel had come out from under the work-table, where
      she slept on the shavings, stretched herself voluptuously and run after
      her master. The people Luka Alexandritch worked for lived a very long way
      off, so that, before he could get to any one of them, the carpenter had
      several times to step into a tavern to fortify himself. Kashtanka
      remembered that on the way she had behaved extremely improperly. In her
      delight that she was being taken for a walk she jumped about, dashed
      barking after the trains, ran into yards, and chased other dogs. The
      carpenter was continually losing sight of her, stopping, and angrily
      shouting at her. Once he had even, with an expression of fury in his face,
      taken her fox-like ear in his fist, smacked her, and said emphatically:
      “Pla-a-ague take you, you pest!”
    

      After having left the work where it had been bespoken, Luka Alexandritch
      went into his sister’s and there had something to eat and drink;
      from his sister’s he had gone to see a bookbinder he knew; from the
      bookbinder’s to a tavern, from the tavern to another crony’s,
      and so on. In short, by the time Kashtanka found herself on the unfamiliar
      pavement, it was getting dusk, and the carpenter was as drunk as a
      cobbler. He was waving his arms and, breathing heavily, muttered:
    

      “In sin my mother bore me! Ah, sins, sins! Here now we are walking
      along the street and looking at the street lamps, but when we die, we
      shall burn in a fiery Gehenna. . . .”
    

      Or he fell into a good-natured tone, called Kashtanka to him, and said to
      her: “You, Kashtanka, are an insect of a creature, and nothing else.
      Beside a man, you are much the same as a joiner beside a cabinet-maker. .
      . .”
    

      While he talked to her in that way, there was suddenly a burst of music.
      Kashtanka looked round and saw that a regiment of soldiers was coming
      straight towards her. Unable to endure the music, which unhinged her
      nerves, she turned round and round and wailed. To her great surprise, the
      carpenter, instead of being frightened, whining and barking, gave a broad
      grin, drew himself up to attention, and saluted with all his five fingers.
      Seeing that her master did not protest, Kashtanka whined louder than ever,
      and dashed across the road to the opposite pavement.
    

      When she recovered herself, the band was not playing and the regiment was
      no longer there. She ran across the road to the spot where she had left
      her master, but alas, the carpenter was no longer there. She dashed
      forward, then back again and ran across the road once more, but the
      carpenter seemed to have vanished into the earth. Kashtanka began sniffing
      the pavement, hoping to find her master by the scent of his tracks, but
      some wretch had been that way just before in new rubber goloshes, and now
      all delicate scents were mixed with an acute stench of india-rubber, so
      that it was impossible to make out anything.
    

      Kashtanka ran up and down and did not find her master, and meanwhile it
      had got dark. The street lamps were lighted on both sides of the road, and
      lights appeared in the windows. Big, fluffy snowflakes were falling and
      painting white the pavement, the horses’ backs and the cabmen’s
      caps, and the darker the evening grew the whiter were all these objects.
      Unknown customers kept walking incessantly to and fro, obstructing her
      field of vision and shoving against her with their feet. (All mankind
      Kashtanka divided into two uneven parts: masters and customers; between
      them there was an essential difference: the first had the right to beat
      her, and the second she had the right to nip by the calves of their legs.)
      These customers were hurrying off somewhere and paid no attention to her.
    

      When it got quite dark, Kashtanka was overcome by despair and horror. She
      huddled up in an entrance and began whining piteously. The long day’s
      journeying with Luka Alexandritch had exhausted her, her ears and her paws
      were freezing, and, what was more, she was terribly hungry. Only twice in
      the whole day had she tasted a morsel: she had eaten a little paste at the
      bookbinder’s, and in one of the taverns she had found a sausage skin
      on the floor, near the counter —that was all. If she had been a
      human being she would have certainly thought: “No, it is impossible
      to live like this! I must shoot myself!”
    

      II
    

      |A Mysterious Stranger


      But she thought of nothing, she simply whined. When her head and back were
      entirely plastered over with the soft feathery snow, and she had sunk into
      a painful doze of exhaustion, all at once the door of the entrance
      clicked, creaked, and struck her on the side. She jumped up. A man
      belonging to the class of customers came out. As Kashtanka whined and got
      under his feet, he could not help noticing her. He bent down to her and
      asked:
    

      “Doggy, where do you come from? Have I hurt you? O, poor thing, poor
      thing. . . . Come, don’t be cross, don’t be cross. . . . I am
      sorry.”
    

      Kashtanka looked at the stranger through the snow-flakes that hung on her
      eyelashes, and saw before her a short, fat little man, with a plump,
      shaven face wearing a top hat and a fur coat that swung open.
    

      “What are you whining for?” he went on, knocking the snow off
      her back with his fingers. “Where is your master? I suppose you are
      lost? Ah, poor doggy! What are we going to do now?”
    

      Catching in the stranger’s voice a warm, cordial note, Kashtanka
      licked his hand, and whined still more pitifully.
    

      “Oh, you nice funny thing!” said the stranger. “A
      regular fox! Well, there’s nothing for it, you must come along with
      me! Perhaps you will be of use for something. . . . Well!”
    

      He clicked with his lips, and made a sign to Kashtanka with his hand,
      which could only mean one thing: “Come along!” Kashtanka went.
    

      Not more than half an hour later she was sitting on the floor in a big,
      light room, and, leaning her head against her side, was looking with
      tenderness and curiosity at the stranger who was sitting at the table,
      dining. He ate and threw pieces to her. . . . At first he gave her bread
      and the green rind of cheese, then a piece of meat, half a pie and chicken
      bones, while through hunger she ate so quickly that she had not time to
      distinguish the taste, and the more she ate the more acute was the feeling
      of hunger.
    

      “Your masters don’t feed you properly,” said the
      stranger, seeing with what ferocious greediness she swallowed the morsels
      without munching them. “And how thin you are! Nothing but skin and
      bones. . . .”
    

      Kashtanka ate a great deal and yet did not satisfy her hunger, but was
      simply stupefied with eating. After dinner she lay down in the middle of
      the room, stretched her legs and, conscious of an agreeable weariness all
      over her body, wagged her tail. While her new master, lounging in an
      easy-chair, smoked a cigar, she wagged her tail and considered the
      question, whether it was better at the stranger’s or at the
      carpenter’s. The stranger’s surroundings were poor and ugly;
      besides the easy-chairs, the sofa, the lamps and the rugs, there was
      nothing, and the room seemed empty. At the carpenter’s the whole
      place was stuffed full of things: he had a table, a bench, a heap of
      shavings, planes, chisels, saws, a cage with a goldfinch, a basin. . . .
      The stranger’s room smelt of nothing, while there was always a thick
      fog in the carpenter’s room, and a glorious smell of glue, varnish,
      and shavings. On the other hand, the stranger had one great superiority—he
      gave her a great deal to eat and, to do him full justice, when Kashtanka
      sat facing the table and looking wistfully at him, he did not once hit or
      kick her, and did not once shout: “Go away, damned brute!”
    

      When he had finished his cigar her new master went out, and a minute later
      came back holding a little mattress in his hands.
    

      “Hey, you dog, come here!” he said, laying the mattress in the
      corner near the dog. “Lie down here, go to sleep!”
    

      Then he put out the lamp and went away. Kashtanka lay down on the mattress
      and shut her eyes; the sound of a bark rose from the street, and she would
      have liked to answer it, but all at once she was overcome with unexpected
      melancholy. She thought of Luka Alexandritch, of his son Fedyushka, and
      her snug little place under the bench. . . . She remembered on the long
      winter evenings, when the carpenter was planing or reading the paper
      aloud, Fedyushka usually played with her. . . . He used to pull her from
      under the bench by her hind legs, and play such tricks with her, that she
      saw green before her eyes, and ached in every joint. He would make her
      walk on her hind legs, use her as a bell, that is, shake her violently by
      the tail so that she squealed and barked, and give her tobacco to sniff .
      . . . The following trick was particularly agonising: Fedyushka would tie
      a piece of meat to a thread and give it to Kashtanka, and then, when she
      had swallowed it he would, with a loud laugh, pull it back again from her
      stomach, and the more lurid were her memories the more loudly and
      miserably Kashtanka whined.
    

      But soon exhaustion and warmth prevailed over melancholy. She began to
      fall asleep. Dogs ran by in her imagination: among them a shaggy old
      poodle, whom she had seen that day in the street with a white patch on his
      eye and tufts of wool by his nose. Fedyushka ran after the poodle with a
      chisel in his hand, then all at once he too was covered with shaggy wool,
      and began merrily barking beside Kashtanka. Kashtanka and he goodnaturedly
      sniffed each other’s noses and merrily ran down the street. . . .
    

      III
    

      |New and Very Agreeable Acquaintances


      When Kashtanka woke up it was already light, and a sound rose from the
      street, such as only comes in the day-time. There was not a soul in the
      room. Kashtanka stretched, yawned and, cross and ill-humoured, walked
      about the room. She sniffed the corners and the furniture, looked into the
      passage and found nothing of interest there. Besides the door that led
      into the passage there was another door. After thinking a little Kashtanka
      scratched on it with both paws, opened it, and went into the adjoining
      room. Here on the bed, covered with a rug, a customer, in whom she
      recognised the stranger of yesterday, lay asleep.
    

      “Rrrrr . . .” she growled, but recollecting yesterday’s
      dinner, wagged her tail, and began sniffing.
    

      She sniffed the stranger’s clothes and boots and thought they smelt
      of horses. In the bedroom was another door, also closed. Kashtanka
      scratched at the door, leaned her chest against it, opened it, and was
      instantly aware of a strange and very suspicious smell. Foreseeing an
      unpleasant encounter, growling and looking about her, Kashtanka walked
      into a little room with a dirty wall-paper and drew back in alarm. She saw
      something surprising and terrible. A grey gander came straight towards
      her, hissing, with its neck bowed down to the floor and its wings
      outspread. Not far from him, on a little mattress, lay a white tom-cat;
      seeing Kashtanka, he jumped up, arched his back, wagged his tail with his
      hair standing on end and he, too, hissed at her. The dog was frightened in
      earnest, but not caring to betray her alarm, began barking loudly and
      dashed at the cat . . . . The cat arched his back more than ever, mewed
      and gave Kashtanka a smack on the head with his paw. Kashtanka jumped
      back, squatted on all four paws, and craning her nose towards the cat,
      went off into loud, shrill barks; meanwhile the gander came up behind and
      gave her a painful peck in the back. Kashtanka leapt up and dashed at the
      gander.
    

      “What’s this?” They heard a loud angry voice, and the
      stranger came into the room in his dressing-gown, with a cigar between his
      teeth. “What’s the meaning of this? To your places!”
    

      He went up to the cat, flicked him on his arched back, and said:
    

      “Fyodor Timofeyitch, what’s the meaning of this? Have you got
      up a fight? Ah, you old rascal! Lie down!”
    

      And turning to the gander he shouted: “Ivan Ivanitch, go home!”
    

      The cat obediently lay down on his mattress and closed his eyes. Judging
      from the expression of his face and whiskers, he was displeased with
      himself for having lost his temper and got into a fight.
    

      Kashtanka began whining resentfully, while the gander craned his neck and
      began saying something rapidly, excitedly, distinctly, but quite
      unintelligibly.
    

      “All right, all right,” said his master, yawning. “You
      must live in peace and friendship.” He stroked Kashtanka and went
      on: “And you, redhair, don’t be frightened. . . . They are
      capital company, they won’t annoy you. Stay, what are we to call
      you? You can’t go on without a name, my dear.”
    

      The stranger thought a moment and said: “I tell you what . . . you
      shall be Auntie. . . . Do you understand? Auntie!”
    

      And repeating the word “Auntie” several times he went out.
      Kashtanka sat down and began watching. The cat sat motionless on his
      little mattress, and pretended to be asleep. The gander, craning his neck
      and stamping, went on talking rapidly and excitedly about something.
      Apparently it was a very clever gander; after every long tirade, he always
      stepped back with an air of wonder and made a show of being highly
      delighted with his own speech. . . . Listening to him and answering
      “R-r-r-r,” Kashtanka fell to sniffing the corners. In one of
      the corners she found a little trough in which she saw some soaked peas
      and a sop of rye crusts. She tried the peas; they were not nice; she tried
      the sopped bread and began eating it. The gander was not at all offended
      that the strange dog was eating his food, but, on the contrary, talked
      even more excitedly, and to show his confidence went to the trough and ate
      a few peas himself.
    

      IV
    

      |Marvels on a Hurdle


      A little while afterwards the stranger came in again, and brought a
      strange thing with him like a hurdle, or like the figure II. On the
      crosspiece on the top of this roughly made wooden frame hung a bell, and a
      pistol was also tied to it; there were strings from the tongue of the
      bell, and the trigger of the pistol. The stranger put the frame in the
      middle of the room, spent a long time tying and untying something, then
      looked at the gander and said: “Ivan Ivanitch, if you please!”
    

      The gander went up to him and stood in an expectant attitude.
    

      “Now then,” said the stranger, “let us begin at the very
      beginning. First of all, bow and make a curtsey! Look sharp!”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch craned his neck, nodded in all directions, and scraped with
      his foot.
    

      “Right. Bravo. . . . Now die!”
    

      The gander lay on his back and stuck his legs in the air. After performing
      a few more similar, unimportant tricks, the stranger suddenly clutched at
      his head, and assuming an expression of horror, shouted: “Help!
      Fire! We are burning!”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch ran to the frame, took the string in his beak, and set the
      bell ringing.
    

      The stranger was very much pleased. He stroked the gander’s neck and
      said:
    

      “Bravo, Ivan Ivanitch! Now pretend that you are a jeweller selling
      gold and diamonds. Imagine now that you go to your shop and find thieves
      there. What would you do in that case?”
    

      The gander took the other string in his beak and pulled it, and at once a
      deafening report was heard. Kashtanka was highly delighted with the bell
      ringing, and the shot threw her into so much ecstasy that she ran round
      the frame barking.
    

      “Auntie, lie down!” cried the stranger; “be quiet!”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch’s task was not ended with the shooting. For a whole
      hour afterwards the stranger drove the gander round him on a cord,
      cracking a whip, and the gander had to jump over barriers and through
      hoops; he had to rear, that is, sit on his tail and wave his legs in the
      air. Kashtanka could not take her eyes off Ivan Ivanitch, wriggled with
      delight, and several times fell to running after him with shrill barks.
      After exhausting the gander and himself, the stranger wiped the sweat from
      his brow and cried:
    

      “Marya, fetch Havronya Ivanovna here!”
    

      A minute later there was the sound of grunting. Kashtanka growled, assumed
      a very valiant air, and to be on the safe side, went nearer to the
      stranger. The door opened, an old woman looked in, and, saying something,
      led in a black and very ugly sow. Paying no attention to Kashtanka’s
      growls, the sow lifted up her little hoof and grunted good-humouredly.
      Apparently it was very agreeable to her to see her master, the cat, and
      Ivan Ivanitch. When she went up to the cat and gave him a light tap on the
      stomach with her hoof, and then made some remark to the gander, a great
      deal of good-nature was expressed in her movements, and the quivering of
      her tail. Kashtanka realised at once that to growl and bark at such a
      character was useless.
    

      The master took away the frame and cried. “Fyodor Timofeyitch, if
      you please!”
    

      The cat stretched lazily, and reluctantly, as though performing a duty,
      went up to the sow.
    

      “Come, let us begin with the Egyptian pyramid,” began the
      master.
    

      He spent a long time explaining something, then gave the word of command,
      “One . . . two . . . three!” At the word “three”
      Ivan Ivanitch flapped his wings and jumped on to the sow’s back. . .
      . When, balancing himself with his wings and his neck, he got a firm
      foothold on the bristly back, Fyodor Timofeyitch listlessly and lazily,
      with manifest disdain, and with an air of scorning his art and not caring
      a pin for it, climbed on to the sow’s back, then reluctantly mounted
      on to the gander, and stood on his hind legs. The result was what the
      stranger called the Egyptian pyramid. Kashtanka yapped with delight, but
      at that moment the old cat yawned and, losing his balance, rolled off the
      gander. Ivan Ivanitch lurched and fell off too. The stranger shouted,
      waved his hands, and began explaining something again. After spending an
      hour over the pyramid their indefatigable master proceeded to teach Ivan
      Ivanitch to ride on the cat, then began to teach the cat to smoke, and so
      on.
    

      The lesson ended in the stranger’s wiping the sweat off his brow and
      going away. Fyodor Timofeyitch gave a disdainful sniff, lay down on his
      mattress, and closed his eyes; Ivan Ivanitch went to the trough, and the
      pig was taken away by the old woman. Thanks to the number of her new
      impressions, Kashranka hardly noticed how the day passed, and in the
      evening she was installed with her mattress in the room with the dirty
      wall-paper, and spent the night in the society of Fyodor Timofeyitch and
      the gander.
    

      V
    

      |Talent! Talent!


      A month passed.
    

      Kashtanka had grown used to having a nice dinner every evening, and being
      called Auntie. She had grown used to the stranger too, and to her new
      companions. Life was comfortable and easy.
    

      Every day began in the same way. As a rule, Ivan Ivanitch was the first to
      wake up, and at once went up to Auntie or to the cat, twisting his neck,
      and beginning to talk excitedly and persuasively, but, as before,
      unintelligibly. Sometimes he would crane up his head in the air and utter
      a long monologue. At first Kashtanka thought he talked so much because he
      was very clever, but after a little time had passed, she lost all her
      respect for him; when he went up to her with his long speeches she no
      longer wagged her tail, but treated him as a tiresome chatterbox, who
      would not let anyone sleep and, without the slightest ceremony, answered
      him with “R-r-r-r!”
    

      Fyodor Timofeyitch was a gentleman of a very different sort. When he woke
      he did not utter a sound, did not stir, and did not even open his eyes. He
      would have been glad not to wake, for, as was evident, he was not greatly
      in love with life. Nothing interested him, he showed an apathetic and
      nonchalant attitude to everything, he disdained everything and, even while
      eating his delicious dinner, sniffed contemptuously.
    

      When she woke Kashtanka began walking about the room and sniffing the
      corners. She and the cat were the only ones allowed to go all over the
      flat; the gander had not the right to cross the threshold of the room with
      the dirty wall-paper, and Hayronya Ivanovna lived somewhere in a little
      outhouse in the yard and made her appearance only during the lessons.
      Their master got up late, and immediately after drinking his tea began
      teaching them their tricks. Every day the frame, the whip, and the hoop
      were brought in, and every day almost the same performance took place. The
      lesson lasted three or four hours, so that sometimes Fyodor Timofeyitch
      was so tired that he staggered about like a drunken man, and Ivan Ivanitch
      opened his beak and breathed heavily, while their master became red in the
      face and could not mop the sweat from his brow fast enough.
    

      The lesson and the dinner made the day very interesting, but the evenings
      were tedious. As a rule, their master went off somewhere in the evening
      and took the cat and the gander with him. Left alone, Auntie lay down on
      her little mattress and began to feel sad.
    

      Melancholy crept on her imperceptibly and took possession of her by
      degrees, as darkness does of a room. It began with the dog’s losing
      every inclination to bark, to eat, to run about the rooms, and even to
      look at things; then vague figures, half dogs, half human beings, with
      countenances attractive, pleasant, but incomprehensible, would appear in
      her imagination; when they came Auntie wagged her tail, and it seemed to
      her that she had somewhere, at some time, seen them and loved them. And as
      she dropped asleep, she always felt that those figures smelt of glue,
      shavings, and varnish.
    

      When she had grown quite used to her new life, and from a thin, long
      mongrel, had changed into a sleek, well-groomed dog, her master looked at
      her one day before the lesson and said:
    

      “It’s high time, Auntie, to get to business. You have kicked
      up your heels in idleness long enough. I want to make an artiste of you. .
      . . Do you want to be an artiste?”
    

      And he began teaching her various accomplishments. At the first lesson he
      taught her to stand and walk on her hind legs, which she liked extremely.
      At the second lesson she had to jump on her hind legs and catch some
      sugar, which her teacher held high above her head. After that, in the
      following lessons she danced, ran tied to a cord, howled to music, rang
      the bell, and fired the pistol, and in a month could successfully replace
      Fyodor Timofeyitch in the “Egyptian Pyramid.” She learned very
      eagerly and was pleased with her own success; running with her tongue out
      on the cord, leaping through the hoop, and riding on old Fyodor
      Timofeyitch, gave her the greatest enjoyment. She accompanied every
      successful trick with a shrill, delighted bark, while her teacher
      wondered, was also delighted, and rubbed his hands.
    

      “It’s talent! It’s talent!” he said. “Unquestionable
      talent! You will certainly be successful!”
    

      And Auntie grew so used to the word talent, that every time her master
      pronounced it, she jumped up as if it had been her name.
    

      VI
    

      |An Uneasy Night


      Auntie had a doggy dream that a porter ran after her with a broom, and she
      woke up in a fright.
    

      It was quite dark and very stuffy in the room. The fleas were biting.
      Auntie had never been afraid of darkness before, but now, for some reason,
      she felt frightened and inclined to bark.
    

      Her master heaved a loud sigh in the next room, then soon afterwards the
      sow grunted in her sty, and then all was still again. When one thinks
      about eating one’s heart grows lighter, and Auntie began thinking
      how that day she had stolen the leg of a chicken from Fyodor Timofeyitch,
      and had hidden it in the drawing-room, between the cupboard and the wall,
      where there were a great many spiders’ webs and a great deal of
      dust. Would it not be as well to go now and look whether the chicken leg
      were still there or not? It was very possible that her master had found it
      and eaten it. But she must not go out of the room before morning, that was
      the rule. Auntie shut her eyes to go to sleep as quickly as possible, for
      she knew by experience that the sooner you go to sleep the sooner the
      morning comes. But all at once there was a strange scream not far from her
      which made her start and jump up on all four legs. It was Ivan Ivanitch,
      and his cry was not babbling and persuasive as usual, but a wild, shrill,
      unnatural scream like the squeak of a door opening. Unable to distinguish
      anything in the darkness, and not understanding what was wrong, Auntie
      felt still more frightened and growled: “R-r-r-r. . . .”
    

      Some time passed, as long as it takes to eat a good bone; the scream was
      not repeated. Little by little Auntie’s uneasiness passed off and
      she began to doze. She dreamed of two big black dogs with tufts of last
      year’s coat left on their haunches and sides; they were eating out
      of a big basin some swill, from which there came a white steam and a most
      appetising smell; from time to time they looked round at Auntie, showed
      their teeth and growled: “We are not going to give you any!”
      But a peasant in a fur-coat ran out of the house and drove them away with
      a whip; then Auntie went up to the basin and began eating, but as soon as
      the peasant went out of the gate, the two black dogs rushed at her
      growling, and all at once there was again a shrill scream.
    

      “K-gee! K-gee-gee!” cried Ivan Ivanitch.
    

      Auntie woke, jumped up and, without leaving her mattress, went off into a
      yelping bark. It seemed to her that it was not Ivan Ivanitch that was
      screaming but someone else, and for some reason the sow again grunted in
      her sty.
    

      Then there was the sound of shuffling slippers, and the master came into
      the room in his dressing-gown with a candle in his hand. The flickering
      light danced over the dirty wall-paper and the ceiling, and chased away
      the darkness. Auntie saw that there was no stranger in the room. Ivan
      Ivanitch was sitting on the floor and was not asleep. His wings were
      spread out and his beak was open, and altogether he looked as though he
      were very tired and thirsty. Old Fyodor Timofeyitch was not asleep either.
      He, too, must have been awakened by the scream.
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch, what’s the matter with you?” the master
      asked the gander. “Why are you screaming? Are you ill?”
    

      The gander did not answer. The master touched him on the neck, stroked his
      back, and said: “You are a queer chap. You don’t sleep
      yourself, and you don’t let other people. . . .”
    

      When the master went out, carrying the candle with him, there was darkness
      again. Auntie felt frightened. The gander did not scream, but again she
      fancied that there was some stranger in the room. What was most dreadful
      was that this stranger could not be bitten, as he was unseen and had no
      shape. And for some reason she thought that something very bad would
      certainly happen that night. Fyodor Timofeyitch was uneasy too.
    

      Auntie could hear him shifting on his mattress, yawning and shaking his
      head.
    

      Somewhere in the street there was a knocking at a gate and the sow grunted
      in her sty. Auntie began to whine, stretched out her front-paws and laid
      her head down upon them. She fancied that in the knocking at the gate, in
      the grunting of the sow, who was for some reason awake, in the darkness
      and the stillness, there was something as miserable and dreadful as in
      Ivan Ivanitch’s scream. Everything was in agitation and anxiety, but
      why? Who was the stranger who could not be seen? Then two dim flashes of
      green gleamed for a minute near Auntie. It was Fyodor Timofeyitch, for the
      first time of their whole acquaintance coming up to her. What did he want?
      Auntie licked his paw, and not asking why he had come, howled softly and
      on various notes.
    

      “K-gee!” cried Ivan Ivanitch, “K-g-ee!”
    

      The door opened again and the master came in with a candle.
    

      The gander was sitting in the same attitude as before, with his beak open,
      and his wings spread out, his eyes were closed.
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch!” his master called him.
    

      The gander did not stir. His master sat down before him on the floor,
      looked at him in silence for a minute, and said:
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch, what is it? Are you dying? Oh, I remember now, I
      remember!” he cried out, and clutched at his head. “I know why
      it is! It’s because the horse stepped on you to-day! My God! My God!”
    

      Auntie did not understand what her master was saying, but she saw from his
      face that he, too, was expecting something dreadful. She stretched out her
      head towards the dark window, where it seemed to her some stranger was
      looking in, and howled.
    

      “He is dying, Auntie!” said her master, and wrung his hands.
      “Yes, yes, he is dying! Death has come into your room. What are we
      to do?”
    

      Pale and agitated, the master went back into his room, sighing and shaking
      his head. Auntie was afraid to remain in the darkness, and followed her
      master into his bedroom. He sat down on the bed and repeated several
      times: “My God, what’s to be done?”
    

      Auntie walked about round his feet, and not understanding why she was
      wretched and why they were all so uneasy, and trying to understand,
      watched every movement he made. Fyodor Timofeyitch, who rarely left his
      little mattress, came into the master’s bedroom too, and began
      rubbing himself against his feet. He shook his head as though he wanted to
      shake painful thoughts out of it, and kept peeping suspiciously under the
      bed.
    

      The master took a saucer, poured some water from his wash-stand into it,
      and went to the gander again.
    

      “Drink, Ivan Ivanitch!” he said tenderly, setting the saucer
      before him; “drink, darling.”
    

      But Ivan Ivanitch did not stir and did not open his eyes. His master bent
      his head down to the saucer and dipped his beak into the water, but the
      gander did not drink, he spread his wings wider than ever, and his head
      remained lying in the saucer.
    

      “No, there’s nothing to be done now,” sighed his master.
      “It’s all over. Ivan Ivanitch is gone!”
    

      And shining drops, such as one sees on the window-pane when it rains,
      trickled down his cheeks. Not understanding what was the matter, Auntie
      and Fyodor Timofeyitch snuggled up to him and looked with horror at the
      gander.
    

      “Poor Ivan Ivanitch!” said the master, sighing mournfully.
      “And I was dreaming I would take you in the spring into the country,
      and would walk with you on the green grass. Dear creature, my good
      comrade, you are no more! How shall I do without you now?”
    

      It seemed to Auntie that the same thing would happen to her, that is, that
      she too, there was no knowing why, would close her eyes, stretch out her
      paws, open her mouth, and everyone would look at her with horror.
      Apparently the same reflections were passing through the brain of Fyodor
      Timofeyitch. Never before had the old cat been so morose and gloomy.
    

      It began to get light, and the unseen stranger who had so frightened
      Auntie was no longer in the room. When it was quite daylight, the porter
      came in, took the gander, and carried him away. And soon afterwards the
      old woman came in and took away the trough.
    

      Auntie went into the drawing-room and looked behind the cupboard: her
      master had not eaten the chicken bone, it was lying in its place among the
      dust and spiders’ webs. But Auntie felt sad and dreary and wanted to
      cry. She did not even sniff at the bone, but went under the sofa, sat down
      there, and began softly whining in a thin voice.
    

      VII
    

      |An Unsuccessful DÃ©but


      One fine evening the master came into the room with the dirty wall-paper,
      and, rubbing his hands, said:
    

      “Well. . . .”
    

      He meant to say something more, but went away without saying it. Auntie,
      who during her lessons had thoroughly studied his face and intonations,
      divined that he was agitated, anxious and, she fancied, angry. Soon
      afterwards he came back and said:
    

      “To-day I shall take with me Auntie and F’yodor Timofeyitch.
      To-day, Auntie, you will take the place of poor Ivan Ivanitch in the
      ‘Egyptian Pyramid.’ Goodness knows how it will be! Nothing is
      ready, nothing has been thoroughly studied, there have been few
      rehearsals! We shall be disgraced, we shall come to grief!”
    

      Then he went out again, and a minute later, came back in his fur-coat and
      top hat. Going up to the cat he took him by the fore-paws and put him
      inside the front of his coat, while Fyodor Timofeyitch appeared completely
      unconcerned, and did not even trouble to open his eyes. To him it was
      apparently a matter of absolute indifference whether he remained lying
      down, or were lifted up by his paws, whether he rested on his mattress or
      under his master’s fur-coat.
    

      “Come along, Auntie,” said her master.
    

      Wagging her tail, and understanding nothing, Auntie followed him. A minute
      later she was sitting in a sledge by her master’s feet and heard
      him, shrinking with cold and anxiety, mutter to himself:
    

      “We shall be disgraced! We shall come to grief!”
    

      The sledge stopped at a big strange-looking house, like a soup-ladle
      turned upside down. The long entrance to this house, with its three glass
      doors, was lighted up with a dozen brilliant lamps. The doors opened with
      a resounding noise and, like jaws, swallowed up the people who were moving
      to and fro at the entrance. There were a great many people, horses, too,
      often ran up to the entrance, but no dogs were to be seen.
    

      The master took Auntie in his arms and thrust her in his coat, where
      Fyodor Timofeyirch already was. It was dark and stuffy there, but warm.
      For an instant two green sparks flashed at her; it was the cat, who opened
      his eyes on being disturbed by his neighbour’s cold rough paws.
      Auntie licked his ear, and, trying to settle herself as comfortably as
      possible, moved uneasily, crushed him under her cold paws, and casually
      poked her head out from under the coat, but at once growled angrily, and
      tucked it in again. It seemed to her that she had seen a huge, badly
      lighted room, full of monsters; from behind screens and gratings, which
      stretched on both sides of the room, horrible faces looked out: faces of
      horses with horns, with long ears, and one fat, huge countenance with a
      tail instead of a nose, and two long gnawed bones sticking out of his
      mouth.
    

      The cat mewed huskily under Auntie’s paws, but at that moment the
      coat was flung open, the master said, “Hop!” and Fyodor
      Timofeyitch and Auntie jumped to the floor. They were now in a little room
      with grey plank walls; there was no other furniture in it but a little
      table with a looking-glass on it, a stool, and some rags hung about the
      corners, and instead of a lamp or candles, there was a bright fan-shaped
      light attached to a little pipe fixed in the wall. Fyodor Timofeyitch
      licked his coat which had been ruffled by Auntie, went under the stool,
      and lay down. Their master, still agitated and rubbing his hands, began
      undressing. . . . He undressed as he usually did at home when he was
      preparing to get under the rug, that is, took off everything but his
      underlinen, then he sat down on the stool, and, looking in the
      looking-glass, began playing the most surprising tricks with himself. . .
      . First of all he put on his head a wig, with a parting and with two tufts
      of hair standing up like horns, then he smeared his face thickly with
      something white, and over the white colour painted his eyebrows, his
      moustaches, and red on his cheeks. His antics did not end with that. After
      smearing his face and neck, he began putting himself into an extraordinary
      and incongruous costume, such as Auntie had never seen before, either in
      houses or in the street. Imagine very full trousers, made of chintz
      covered with big flowers, such as is used in working-class houses for
      curtains and covering furniture, trousers which buttoned up just under his
      armpits. One trouser leg was made of brown chintz, the other of bright
      yellow. Almost lost in these, he then put on a short chintz jacket, with a
      big scalloped collar, and a gold star on the back, stockings of different
      colours, and green slippers.
    

      Everything seemed going round before Auntie’s eyes and in her soul.
      The white-faced, sack-like figure smelt like her master, its voice, too,
      was the familiar master’s voice, but there were moments when Auntie
      was tortured by doubts, and then she was ready to run away from the
      parti-coloured figure and to bark. The new place, the fan-shaped light,
      the smell, the transformation that had taken place in her master—all
      this aroused in her a vague dread and a foreboding that she would
      certainly meet with some horror such as the big face with the tail instead
      of a nose. And then, somewhere through the wall, some hateful band was
      playing, and from time to time she heard an incomprehensible roar. Only
      one thing reassured her—that was the imperturbability of Fyodor
      Timofeyitch. He dozed with the utmost tranquillity under the stool, and
      did not open his eyes even when it was moved.
    

      A man in a dress coat and a white waistcoat peeped into the little room
      and said:
    

      “Miss Arabella has just gone on. After her—you.”
    

      Their master made no answer. He drew a small box from under the table, sat
      down, and waited. From his lips and his hands it could be seen that he was
      agitated, and Auntie could hear how his breathing came in gasps.
    

      “Monsieur George, come on!” someone shouted behind the door.
      Their master got up and crossed himself three times, then took the cat
      from under the stool and put him in the box.
    

      “Come, Auntie,” he said softly.
    

      Auntie, who could make nothing out of it, went up to his hands, he kissed
      her on the head, and put her beside Fyodor Timofeyitch. Then followed
      darkness. . . . Auntie trampled on the cat, scratched at the walls of the
      box, and was so frightened that she could not utter a sound, while the box
      swayed and quivered, as though it were on the waves. . . .
    

      “Here we are again!” her master shouted aloud: “here we
      are again!”
    

      Auntie felt that after that shout the box struck against something hard
      and left off swaying. There was a loud deep roar, someone was being
      slapped, and that someone, probably the monster with the tail instead of a
      nose, roared and laughed so loud that the locks of the box trembled. In
      response to the roar, there came a shrill, squeaky laugh from her master,
      such as he never laughed at home.
    

      “Ha!” he shouted, trying to shout above the roar. “Honoured
      friends! I have only just come from the station! My granny’s kicked
      the bucket and left me a fortune! There is something very heavy in the
      box, it must be gold, ha! ha! I bet there’s a million here! We’ll
      open it and look. . . .”
    

      The lock of the box clicked. The bright light dazzled Auntie’s eyes,
      she jumped out of the box, and, deafened by the roar, ran quickly round
      her master, and broke into a shrill bark.
    

      “Ha!” exclaimed her master. “Uncle Fyodor Timofeyitch!
      Beloved Aunt, dear relations! The devil take you!”
    

      He fell on his stomach on the sand, seized the cat and Auntie, and fell to
      embracing them. While he held Auntie tight in his arms, she glanced round
      into the world into which fate had brought her and, impressed by its
      immensity, was for a minute dumbfounded with amazement and delight, then
      jumped out of her master’s arms, and to express the intensity of her
      emotions, whirled round and round on one spot like a top. This new world
      was big and full of bright light; wherever she looked, on all sides, from
      floor to ceiling there were faces, faces, faces, and nothing else.
    

      “Auntie, I beg you to sit down!” shouted her master.
      Remembering what that meant, Auntie jumped on to a chair, and sat down.
      She looked at her master. His eyes looked at her gravely and kindly as
      always, but his face, especially his mouth and teeth, were made grotesque
      by a broad immovable grin. He laughed, skipped about, twitched his
      shoulders, and made a show of being very merry in the presence of the
      thousands of faces. Auntie believed in his merriment, all at once felt all
      over her that those thousands of faces were looking at her, lifted up her
      fox-like head, and howled joyously.
    

      “You sit there, Auntie,” her master said to her, “while
      Uncle and I will dance the Kamarinsky.”
    

      Fyodor Timofeyitch stood looking about him indifferently, waiting to be
      made to do something silly. He danced listlessly, carelessly, sullenly,
      and one could see from his movements, his tail and his ears, that he had a
      profound contempt for the crowd, the bright light, his master and himself.
      When he had performed his allotted task, he gave a yawn and sat down.
    

      “Now, Auntie!” said her master, “we’ll have first
      a song, and then a dance, shall we?”
    

      He took a pipe out of his pocket, and began playing. Auntie, who could not
      endure music, began moving uneasily in her chair and howled. A roar of
      applause rose from all sides. Her master bowed, and when all was still
      again, went on playing. . . . Just as he took one very high note, someone
      high up among the audience uttered a loud exclamation:
    

      “Auntie!” cried a child’s voice, “why it’s
      Kashtanka!”
    

      “Kashtanka it is!” declared a cracked drunken tenor. “Kashtanka!
      Strike me dead, Fedyushka, it is Kashtanka. Kashtanka! here!”
    

      Someone in the gallery gave a whistle, and two voices, one a boy’s
      and one a man’s, called loudly: “Kashtanka! Kashtanka!”
    

      Auntie started, and looked where the shouting came from. Two faces, one
      hairy, drunken and grinning, the other chubby, rosy-cheeked and
      frightened-looking, dazed her eyes as the bright light had dazed them
      before. . . . She remembered, fell off the chair, struggled on the sand,
      then jumped up, and with a delighted yap dashed towards those faces. There
      was a deafening roar, interspersed with whistles and a shrill childish
      shout: “Kashtanka! Kashtanka!”
    

      Auntie leaped over the barrier, then across someone’s shoulders. She
      found herself in a box: to get into the next tier she had to leap over a
      high wall. Auntie jumped, but did not jump high enough, and slipped back
      down the wall. Then she was passed from hand to hand, licked hands and
      faces, kept mounting higher and higher, and at last got into the gallery.
      . . .
    

                             ——


      Half an hour afterwards, Kashtanka was in the street, following the people
      who smelt of glue and varnish. Luka Alexandritch staggered and
      instinctively, taught by experience, tried to keep as far from the gutter
      as possible.
    

      “In sin my mother bore me,” he muttered. “And you,
      Kashtanka, are a thing of little understanding. Beside a man, you are like
      a joiner beside a cabinetmaker.”
    

      Fedyushka walked beside him, wearing his father’s cap. Kashtanka
      looked at their backs, and it seemed to her that she had been following
      them for ages, and was glad that there had not been a break for a minute
      in her life.
    

      She remembered the little room with dirty wall-paper, the gander, Fyodor
      Timofeyitch, the delicious dinners, the lessons, the circus, but all that
      seemed to her now like a long, tangled, oppressive dream.
    











      A CHAMELEON
    

THE police
      superintendent Otchumyelov is walking across the market square wearing a
      new overcoat and carrying a parcel under his arm. A red-haired policeman
      strides after him with a sieve full of confiscated gooseberries in his
      hands. There is silence all around. Not a soul in the square. . . . The
      open doors of the shops and taverns look out upon God’s world
      disconsolately, like hungry mouths; there is not even a beggar near them.
    

      “So you bite, you damned brute?” Otchumyelov hears suddenly.
      “Lads, don’t let him go! Biting is prohibited nowadays! Hold
      him! ah . . . ah!”
    

      There is the sound of a dog yelping. Otchumyelov looks in the direction of
      the sound and sees a dog, hopping on three legs and looking about her, run
      out of Pitchugin’s timber-yard. A man in a starched cotton shirt,
      with his waistcoat unbuttoned, is chasing her. He runs after her, and
      throwing his body forward falls down and seizes the dog by her hind legs.
      Once more there is a yelping and a shout of “Don’t let go!”
      Sleepy countenances are protruded from the shops, and soon a crowd, which
      seems to have sprung out of the earth, is gathered round the timber-yard.
    

      “It looks like a row, your honour . . .” says the policeman.
    

      Otchumyelov makes a half turn to the left and strides towards the crowd.
    

      He sees the aforementioned man in the unbuttoned waistcoat standing close
      by the gate of the timber-yard, holding his right hand in the air and
      displaying a bleeding finger to the crowd. On his half-drunken face there
      is plainly written: “I’ll pay you out, you rogue!” and
      indeed the very finger has the look of a flag of victory. In this man
      Otchumyelov recognises Hryukin, the goldsmith. The culprit who has caused
      the sensation, a white borzoy puppy with a sharp muzzle and a yellow patch
      on her back, is sitting on the ground with her fore-paws outstretched in
      the middle of the crowd, trembling all over. There is an expression of
      misery and terror in her tearful eyes.
    

      “What’s it all about?” Otchumyelov inquires, pushing his
      way through the crowd. “What are you here for? Why are you waving
      your finger . . . ? Who was it shouted?”
    

      “I was walking along here, not interfering with anyone, your honour,”
      Hryukin begins, coughing into his fist. “I was talking about
      firewood to Mitry Mitritch, when this low brute for no rhyme or reason bit
      my finger. . . . You must excuse me, I am a working man. . . . Mine is
      fine work. I must have damages, for I shan’t be able to use this
      finger for a week, may be. . . . It’s not even the law, your honour,
      that one should put up with it from a beast. . . . If everyone is going to
      be bitten, life won’t be worth living. . . .”
    

      “H’m. Very good,” says Otchumyelov sternly, coughing and
      raising his eyebrows. “Very good. Whose dog is it? I won’t let
      this pass! I’ll teach them to let their dogs run all over the place!
      It’s time these gentry were looked after, if they won’t obey
      the regulations! When he’s fined, the blackguard, I’ll teach
      him what it means to keep dogs and such stray cattle! I’ll give him
      a lesson! . . . Yeldyrin,” cries the superintendent, addressing the
      policeman, “find out whose dog this is and draw up a report! And the
      dog must be strangled. Without delay! It’s sure to be mad. . . .
      Whose dog is it, I ask?”
    

      “I fancy it’s General Zhigalov’s,” says someone in
      the crowd.
    

      “General Zhigalov’s, h’m. . . . Help me off with my
      coat, Yeldyrin . . . it’s frightfully hot! It must be a sign of
      rain. . . . There’s one thing I can’t make out, how it came to
      bite you?” Otchumyelov turns to Hryukin. “Surely it couldn’t
      reach your finger. It’s a little dog, and you are a great hulking
      fellow! You must have scratched your finger with a nail, and then the idea
      struck you to get damages for it. We all know . . . your sort! I know you
      devils!”
    

      “He put a cigarette in her face, your honour, for a joke, and she
      had the sense to snap at him. . . . He is a nonsensical fellow, your
      honour!”
    

      “That’s a lie, Squinteye! You didn’t see, so why tell
      lies about it? His honour is a wise gentleman, and will see who is telling
      lies and who is telling the truth, as in God’s sight. . . . And if I
      am lying let the court decide. It’s written in the law. . . . We are
      all equal nowadays. My own brother is in the gendarmes . . . let me tell
      you. . . .”
    

      “Don’t argue!”
    

      “No, that’s not the General’s dog,” says the
      policeman, with profound conviction, “the General hasn’t got
      one like that. His are mostly setters.”
    

      “Do you know that for a fact?”
    

      “Yes, your honour.”
    

      “I know it, too. The General has valuable dogs, thoroughbred, and
      this is goodness knows what! No coat, no shape. . . . A low creature. And
      to keep a dog like that! . . . where’s the sense of it. If a dog
      like that were to turn up in Petersburg or Moscow, do you know what would
      happen? They would not worry about the law, they would strangle it in a
      twinkling! You’ve been injured, Hryukin, and we can’t let the
      matter drop. . . . We must give them a lesson! It is high time . . . . !”
    

      “Yet maybe it is the General’s,” says the policeman,
      thinking aloud. “It’s not written on its face. . . . I saw one
      like it the other day in his yard.”
    

      “It is the General’s, that’s certain!” says a
      voice in the crowd.
    

      “H’m, help me on with my overcoat, Yeldyrin, my lad . . . the
      wind’s getting up. . . . I am cold. . . . You take it to the General’s,
      and inquire there. Say I found it and sent it. And tell them not to let it
      out into the street. . . . It may be a valuable dog, and if every swine
      goes sticking a cigar in its mouth, it will soon be ruined. A dog is a
      delicate animal. . . . And you put your hand down, you blockhead. It’s
      no use your displaying your fool of a finger. It’s your own fault. .
      . .”
    

      “Here comes the General’s cook, ask him. . . Hi, Prohor! Come
      here, my dear man! Look at this dog. . . . Is it one of yours?”
    

      “What an idea! We have never had one like that!”
    

      “There’s no need to waste time asking,” says
      Otchumyelov. “It’s a stray dog! There’s no need to waste
      time talking about it. . . . Since he says it’s a stray dog, a stray
      dog it is. . . . It must be destroyed, that’s all about it.”
    

      “It is not our dog,” Prohor goes on. “It belongs to the
      General’s brother, who arrived the other day. Our master does not
      care for hounds. But his honour is fond of them. . . .”
    

      “You don’t say his Excellency’s brother is here?
      Vladimir Ivanitch?” inquires Otchumyelov, and his whole face beams
      with an ecstatic smile. “‘Well, I never! And I didn’t
      know! Has he come on a visit?
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Well, I never. . . . He couldn’t stay away from his brother.
      . . . And there I didn’t know! So this is his honour’s dog?
      Delighted to hear it. . . . Take it. It’s not a bad pup. . . . A
      lively creature. . . . Snapped at this fellow’s finger! Ha-ha-ha. .
      . . Come, why are you shivering? Rrr . . . Rrrr. . . . The rogue’s
      angry . . . a nice little pup.”
    

      Prohor calls the dog, and walks away from the timber-yard with her. The
      crowd laughs at Hryukin.
    

      “I’ll make you smart yet!” Otchumyelov threatens him,
      and wrapping himself in his greatcoat, goes on his way across the square.
    











      THE DEPENDENTS
    

MIHAIL PETROVITCH
      ZOTOV, a decrepit and solitary old man of seventy, belonging to the
      artisan class, was awakened by the cold and the aching in his old limbs.
      It was dark in his room, but the little lamp before the ikon was no longer
      burning. Zotov raised the curtain and looked out of the window. The clouds
      that shrouded the sky were beginning to show white here and there, and the
      air was becoming transparent, so it must have been nearly five, not more.
    

      Zotov cleared his throat, coughed, and shrinking from the cold, got out of
      bed. In accordance with years of habit, he stood for a long time before
      the ikon, saying his prayers. He repeated “Our Father,”
      “Hail Mary,” the Creed, and mentioned a long string of names.
      To whom those names belonged he had forgotten years ago, and he only
      repeated them from habit. From habit, too, he swept his room and entry,
      and set his fat little four-legged copper samovar. If Zotov had not had
      these habits he would not have known how to occupy his old age.
    

      The little samovar slowly began to get hot, and all at once, unexpectedly,
      broke into a tremulous bass hum.
    

      “Oh, you’ve started humming!” grumbled Zotov. “Hum
      away then, and bad luck to you!”
    

      At that point the old man appropriately recalled that, in the preceding
      night, he had dreamed of a stove, and to dream of a stove is a sign of
      sorrow.
    

      Dreams and omens were the only things left that could rouse him to
      reflection; and on this occasion he plunged with a special zest into the
      considerations of the questions: What the samovar was humming for? and
      what sorrow was foretold by the stove? The dream seemed to come true from
      the first. Zotov rinsed out his teapot and was about to make his tea, when
      he found there was not one teaspoonful left in the box.
    

      “What an existence!” he grumbled, rolling crumbs of black
      bread round in his mouth. “It’s a dog’s life. No tea!
      And it isn’t as though I were a simple peasant: I’m an artisan
      and a house-owner. The disgrace!”
    

      Grumbling and talking to himself, Zotov put on his overcoat, which was
      like a crinoline, and, thrusting his feet into huge clumsy golosh-boots
      (made in the year 1867 by a bootmaker called Prohoritch), went out into
      the yard. The air was grey, cold, and sullenly still. The big yard, full
      of tufts of burdock and strewn with yellow leaves, was faintly silvered
      with autumn frost. Not a breath of wind nor a sound. The old man sat down
      on the steps of his slanting porch, and at once there happened what
      happened regularly every morning: his dog Lyska, a big, mangy,
      decrepit-looking, white yard-dog, with black patches, came up to him with
      its right eye shut. Lyska came up timidly, wriggling in a frightened way,
      as though her paws were not touching the earth but a hot stove, and the
      whole of her wretched figure was expressive of abjectness. Zotov pretended
      not to notice her, but when she faintly wagged her tail, and, wriggling as
      before, licked his golosh, he stamped his foot angrily.
    

      “Be off! The plague take you!” he cried. “Con-found-ed
      bea-east!”
    

      Lyska moved aside, sat down, and fixed her solitary eye upon her master.
    

      “You devils!” he went on. “You are the last straw on my
      back, you Herods.”
    

      And he looked with hatred at his shed with its crooked, overgrown roof;
      there from the door of the shed a big horse’s head was looking out
      at him. Probably flattered by its master’s attention, the head
      moved, pushed forward, and there emerged from the shed the whole horse, as
      decrepit as Lyska, as timid and as crushed, with spindly legs, grey hair,
      a pinched stomach, and a bony spine. He came out of the shed and stood
      still, hesitating as though overcome with embarrassment.
    

      “Plague take you,” Zotov went on. “Shall I ever see the
      last of you, you jail-bird Pharaohs! . . . I wager you want your
      breakfast!” he jeered, twisting his angry face into a contemptuous
      smile. “By all means, this minute! A priceless steed like you must
      have your fill of the best oats! Pray begin! This minute! And I have
      something to give to the magnificent, valuable dog! If a precious dog like
      you does not care for bread, you can have meat.”
    

      Zotov grumbled for half an hour, growing more and more irritated. In the
      end, unable to control the anger that boiled up in him, he jumped up,
      stamped with his goloshes, and growled out to be heard all over the yard:
    

      “I am not obliged to feed you, you loafers! I am not some
      millionaire for you to eat me out of house and home! I have nothing to eat
      myself, you cursed carcases, the cholera take you! I get no pleasure or
      profit out of you; nothing but trouble and ruin, Why don’t you give
      up the ghost? Are you such personages that even death won’t take
      you? You can live, damn you! but I don’t want to feed you! I have
      had enough of you! I don’t want to!”
    

      Zotov grew wrathful and indignant, and the horse and the dog listened.
      Whether these two dependents understood that they were being reproached
      for living at his expense, I don’t know, but their stomachs looked
      more pinched than ever, and their whole figures shrivelled up, grew
      gloomier and more abject than before. . . . Their submissive air
      exasperated Zotov more than ever.
    

      “Get away!” he shouted, overcome by a sort of inspiration.
      “Out of my house! Don’t let me set eyes on you again! I am not
      obliged to keep all sorts of rubbish in my yard! Get away!”
    

      The old man moved with little hurried steps to the gate, opened it, and
      picking up a stick from the ground, began driving out his dependents. The
      horse shook its head, moved its shoulder-blades, and limped to the gate;
      the dog followed him. Both of them went out into the street, and, after
      walking some twenty paces, stopped at the fence.
    

      “I’ll give it you!” Zotov threatened them.
    

      When he had driven out his dependents he felt calmer, and began sweeping
      the yard. From time to time he peeped out into the street: the horse and
      the dog were standing like posts by the fence, looking dejectedly towards
      the gate.
    

      “Try how you can do without me,” muttered the old man, feeling
      as though a weight of anger were being lifted from his heart. “Let
      somebody else look after you now! I am stingy and ill-tempered. . . . It’s
      nasty living with me, so you try living with other people . . . . Yes. . .
      .”
    

      After enjoying the crushed expression of his dependents, and grumbling to
      his heart’s content, Zotov went out of the yard, and, assuming a
      ferocious air, shouted:
    

      “Well, why are you standing there? Whom are you waiting for?
      Standing right across the middle of the road and preventing the public
      from passing! Go into the yard!”
    

      The horse and the dog with drooping heads and a guilty air turned towards
      the gate. Lyska, probably feeling she did not deserve forgiveness, whined
      piteously.
    

      “Stay you can, but as for food, you’ll get nothing from me!
      You may die, for all I care!”
    

      Meanwhile the sun began to break through the morning mist; its slanting
      rays gilded over the autumn frost. There was a sound of steps and voices.
      Zotov put back the broom in its place, and went out of the yard to see his
      crony and neighbour, Mark Ivanitch, who kept a little general shop. On
      reaching his friend’s shop, he sat down on a folding-stool, sighed
      sedately, stroked his beard, and began about the weather. From the weather
      the friends passed to the new deacon, from the deacon to the choristers;
      and the conversation lengthened out. They did not notice as they talked
      how time was passing, and when the shop-boy brought in a big teapot of
      boiling water, and the friends proceeded to drink tea, the time flew as
      quickly as a bird. Zotov got warm and felt more cheerful.
    

      “I have a favour to ask of you, Mark Ivanitch,” he began,
      after the sixth glass, drumming on the counter with his fingers. “If
      you would just be so kind as to give me a gallon of oats again to-day. . .
      .”
    

      From behind the big tea-chest behind which Mark Ivanitch was sitting came
      the sound of a deep sigh.
    

      “Do be so good,” Zotov went on; “never mind tea—don’t
      give it me to-day, but let me have some oats. . . . I am ashamed to ask
      you, I have wearied you with my poverty, but the horse is hungry.”
    

      “I can give it you,” sighed the friend—“why not?
      But why the devil do you keep those carcases?—tfoo!—Tell me
      that, please. It would be all right if it were a useful horse, but—tfoo!—
      one is ashamed to look at it. . . . And the dog’s nothing but a
      skeleton! Why the devil do you keep them?”
    

      “What am I to do with them?”
    

      “You know. Take them to Ignat the slaughterer—that is all
      there is to do. They ought to have been there long ago. It’s the
      proper place for them.”
    

      “To be sure, that is so! . . . I dare say! . . .”
    

      “You live like a beggar and keep animals,” the friend went on.
      “I don’t grudge the oats. . . . God bless you. But as to the
      future, brother . . . I can’t afford to give regularly every day!
      There is no end to your poverty! One gives and gives, and one doesn’t
      know when there will be an end to it all.”
    

      The friend sighed and stroked his red face.
    

      “If you were dead that would settle it,” he said. “You
      go on living, and you don’t know what for. . . . Yes, indeed! But if
      it is not the Lord’s will for you to die, you had better go
      somewhere into an almshouse or a refuge.”
    

      “What for? I have relations. I have a great-niece. . . .”
    

      And Zotov began telling at great length of his great-niece Glasha,
      daughter of his niece Katerina, who lived somewhere on a farm.
    

      “She is bound to keep me!” he said. “My house will be
      left to her, so let her keep me; I’ll go to her. It’s Glasha,
      you know . . . Katya’s daughter; and Katya, you know, was my brother
      Panteley’s stepdaughter. . . . You understand? The house will come
      to her . . . . Let her keep me!”
    

      “To be sure; rather than live, as you do, a beggar, I should have
      gone to her long ago.”
    

      “I will go! As God’s above, I will go. It’s her duty.”
    

      When an hour later the old friends were drinking a glass of vodka, Zotov
      stood in the middle of the shop and said with enthusiasm:
    

      “I have been meaning to go to her for a long time; I will go this
      very day.”
    

      “To be sure; rather than hanging about and dying of hunger, you
      ought to have gone to the farm long ago.”
    

      “I’ll go at once! When I get there, I shall say: Take my
      house, but keep me and treat me with respect. It’s your duty! If you
      don’t care to, then there is neither my house, nor my blessing for
      you! Good-bye, Ivanitch!”
    

      Zotov drank another glass, and, inspired by the new idea, hurried home.
      The vodka had upset him and his head was reeling, but instead of lying
      down, he put all his clothes together in a bundle, said a prayer, took his
      stick, and went out. Muttering and tapping on the stones with his stick,
      he walked the whole length of the street without looking back, and found
      himself in the open country. It was eight or nine miles to the farm. He
      walked along the dry road, looked at the town herd lazily munching the
      yellow grass, and pondered on the abrupt change in his life which he had
      only just brought about so resolutely. He thought, too, about his
      dependents. When he went out of the house, he had not locked the gate, and
      so had left them free to go whither they would.
    

      He had not gone a mile into the country when he heard steps behind him. He
      looked round and angrily clasped his hands. The horse and Lyska, with
      their heads drooping and their tails between their legs, were quietly
      walking after him.
    

      “Go back!” he waved to them.
    

      They stopped, looked at one another, looked at him. He went on, they
      followed him. Then he stopped and began ruminating. It was impossible to
      go to his great-niece Glasha, whom he hardly knew, with these creatures;
      he did not want to go back and shut them up, and, indeed, he could not
      shut them up, because the gate was no use.
    

      “To die of hunger in the shed,” thought Zotov. “Hadn’t
      I really better take them to Ignat?”
    

      Ignat’s hut stood on the town pasture-ground, a hundred paces from
      the flagstaff. Though he had not quite made up his mind, and did not know
      what to do, he turned towards it. His head was giddy and there was a
      darkness before his eyes. . . .
    

      He remembers little of what happened in the slaughterer’s yard. He
      has a memory of a sickening, heavy smell of hides and the savoury steam of
      the cabbage-soup Ignat was sipping when he went in to him. As in a dream
      he saw Ignat, who made him wait two hours, slowly preparing something,
      changing his clothes, talking to some women about corrosive sublimate; he
      remembered the horse was put into a stand, after which there was the sound
      of two dull thuds, one of a blow on the skull, the other of the fall of a
      heavy body. When Lyska, seeing the death of her friend, flew at Ignat,
      barking shrilly, there was the sound of a third blow that cut short the
      bark abruptly. Further, Zotov remembers that in his drunken foolishness,
      seeing the two corpses, he went up to the stand, and put his own forehead
      ready for a blow.
    

      And all that day his eyes were dimmed by a haze, and he could not even see
      his own fingers.
    











      WHO WAS TO BLAME?
    

As my uncle Pyotr
      Demyanitch, a lean, bilious collegiate councillor, exceedingly like a
      stale smoked fish with a stick through it, was getting ready to go to the
      high school, where he taught Latin, he noticed that the corner of his
      grammar was nibbled by mice.
    

      “I say, Praskovya,” he said, going into the kitchen and
      addressing the cook, “how is it we have got mice here? Upon my word!
      yesterday my top hat was nibbled, to-day they have disfigured my Latin
      grammar . . . . At this rate they will soon begin eating my clothes!
    

      “What can I do? I did not bring them in!” answered Praskovya.
    

      “We must do something! You had better get a cat, hadn’t you?”
    

      “I’ve got a cat, but what good is it?”
    

      And Praskovya pointed to the corner where a white kitten, thin as a match,
      lay curled up asleep beside a broom.
    

      “Why is it no good?” asked Pyotr Demyanitch.
    

      “It’s young yet, and foolish. It’s not two months old
      yet.”
    

      “H’m. . . . Then it must be trained. It had much better be
      learning instead of lying there.”
    

      Saying this, Pyotr Demyanitch sighed with a careworn air and went out of
      the kitchen. The kitten raised his head, looked lazily after him, and shut
      his eyes again.
    

      The kitten lay awake thinking. Of what? Unacquainted with real life,
      having no store of accumulated impressions, his mental processes could
      only be instinctive, and he could but picture life in accordance with the
      conceptions that he had inherited, together with his flesh and blood, from
      his ancestors, the tigers (vide Darwin). His thoughts were of the
      nature of day-dreams. His feline imagination pictured something like the
      Arabian desert, over which flitted shadows closely resembling Praskovya,
      the stove, the broom. In the midst of the shadows there suddenly appeared
      a saucer of milk; the saucer began to grow paws, it began moving and
      displayed a tendency to run; the kitten made a bound, and with a thrill of
      blood-thirsty sensuality thrust his claws into it.
    

      When the saucer had vanished into obscurity a piece of meat appeared,
      dropped by Praskovya; the meat ran away with a cowardly squeak, but the
      kitten made a bound and got his claws into it. . . . Everything that rose
      before the imagination of the young dreamer had for its starting-point
      leaps, claws, and teeth. . . The soul of another is darkness, and a cat’s
      soul more than most, but how near the visions just described are to the
      truth may be seen from the following fact: under the influence of his
      day-dreams the kitten suddenly leaped up, looked with flashing eyes at
      Praskovya, ruffled up his coat, and making one bound, thrust his claws
      into the cook’s skirt. Obviously he was born a mouse catcher, a
      worthy son of his bloodthirsty ancestors. Fate had destined him to be the
      terror of cellars, store-rooms and cornbins, and had it not been for
      education . . . we will not anticipate, however.
    

      On his way home from the high school, Pyotr Demyanitch went into a general
      shop and bought a mouse-trap for fifteen kopecks. At dinner he fixed a
      little bit of his rissole on the hook, and set the trap under the sofa,
      where there were heaps of the pupils’ old exercise-books, which
      Praskovya used for various domestic purposes. At six o’clock in the
      evening, when the worthy Latin master was sitting at the table correcting
      his pupils’ exercises, there was a sudden “klop!” so
      loud that my uncle started and dropped his pen. He went at once to the
      sofa and took out the trap. A neat little mouse, the size of a thimble,
      was sniffing the wires and trembling with fear.
    

      “Aha,” muttered Pyotr Demyanitch, and he looked at the mouse
      malignantly, as though he were about to give him a bad mark. “You
      are cau—aught, wretch! Wait a bit! I’ll teach you to eat my
      grammar!”
    

      Having gloated over his victim, Poytr Demyanitch put the mouse-trap on the
      floor and called:
    

      “Praskovya, there’s a mouse caught! Bring the kitten here!
    

      “I’m coming,” responded Praskovya, and a minute later
      she came in with the descendant of tigers in her arms.
    

      “Capital!” said Pyotr Demyanitch, rubbing his hands. “We
      will give him a lesson. . . . Put him down opposite the mouse-trap . . .
      that’s it. . . . Let him sniff it and look at it. . . . That’s
      it. . . .”
    

      The kitten looked wonderingly at my uncle, at his arm-chair, sniffed the
      mouse-trap in bewilderment, then, frightened probably by the glaring
      lamplight and the attention directed to him, made a dash and ran in terror
      to the door.
    

      “Stop!” shouted my uncle, seizing him by the tail, “stop,
      you rascal! He’s afraid of a mouse, the idiot! Look! It’s a
      mouse! Look! Well? Look, I tell you!”
    

      Pyotr Demyanitch took the kitten by the scruff of the neck and pushed him
      with his nose against the mouse-trap.
    

      “Look, you carrion! Take him and hold him, Praskovya. . . . Hold him
      opposite the door of the trap. . . . When I let the mouse out, you let him
      go instantly. . . . Do you hear? . . . Instantly let go! Now!”
    

      My uncle assumed a mysterious expression and lifted the door of the trap.
      . . . The mouse came out irresolutely, sniffed the air, and flew like an
      arrow under the sofa. . . . The kitten on being released darted under the
      table with his tail in the air.
    

      “It has got away! got away!” cried Pyotr Demyanitch, looking
      ferocious. “Where is he, the scoundrel? Under the table? You wait. .
      .”
    

      My uncle dragged the kitten from under the table and shook him in the air.
    

      “Wretched little beast,” he muttered, smacking him on the ear.
      “Take that, take that! Will you shirk it next time? Wr-r-r-etch. . .
      .”
    

      Next day Praskovya heard again the summons.
    

      “Praskovya, there is a mouse caught! Bring the kitten here!”
    

      After the outrage of the previous day the kitten had taken refuge under
      the stove and had not come out all night. When Praskovya pulled him out
      and, carrying him by the scruff of the neck into the study, set him down
      before the mouse-trap, he trembled all over and mewed piteously.
    

      “Come, let him feel at home first,” Pyotr Demyanitch
      commanded. “Let him look and sniff. Look and learn! Stop, plague
      take you!” he shouted, noticing that the kitten was backing away
      from the mouse-trap. “I’ll thrash you! Hold him by the ear!
      That’s it. . . . Well now, set him down before the trap. . . .”
    

      My uncle slowly lifted the door of the trap . . . the mouse whisked under
      the very nose of the kitten, flung itself against Praskovya’s hand
      and fled under the cupboard; the kitten, feeling himself free, took a
      desperate bound and retreated under the sofa.
    

      “He’s let another mouse go!” bawled Pyotr Demyanitch.
      “Do you call that a cat? Nasty little beast! Thrash him! thrash him
      by the mousetrap!”
    

      When the third mouse had been caught, the kitten shivered all over at the
      sight of the mousetrap and its inmate, and scratched Praskovya’s
      hand. . . . After the fourth mouse my uncle flew into a rage, kicked the
      kitten, and said:
    

      “Take the nasty thing away! Get rid of it! Chuck it away! It’s
      no earthly use!”
    

      A year passed, the thin, frail kitten had turned into a solid and
      sagacious tom-cat. One day he was on his way by the back yards to an
      amatory interview. He had just reached his destination when he suddenly
      heard a rustle, and thereupon caught sight of a mouse which ran from a
      water-trough towards a stable; my hero’s hair stood on end, he
      arched his back, hissed, and trembling all over, took to ignominious
      flight.
    

      Alas! sometimes I feel myself in the ludicrous position of the flying cat.
      Like the kitten, I had in my day the honour of being taught Latin by my
      uncle. Now, whenever I chance to see some work of classical antiquity,
      instead of being moved to eager enthusiasm, I begin recalling, ut
      consecutivum, the irregular verbs, the sallow grey face of my uncle,
      the ablative absolute. . . . I turn pale, my hair stands up on my head,
      and, like the cat, I take to ignominious flight.
    











      THE BIRD MARKET
    

THERE is a small
      square near the monastery of the Holy Birth which is called Trubnoy, or
      simply Truboy; there is a market there on Sundays. Hundreds of sheepskins,
      wadded coats, fur caps, and chimneypot hats swarm there, like crabs in a
      sieve. There is the sound of the twitter of birds in all sorts of keys,
      recalling the spring. If the sun is shining, and there are no clouds in
      the sky, the singing of the birds and the smell of hay make a more vivid
      impression, and this reminder of spring sets one thinking and carries one’s
      fancy far, far away. Along one side of the square there stands a string of
      waggons. The waggons are loaded, not with hay, not with cabbages, nor with
      beans, but with goldfinches, siskins, larks, blackbirds and thrushes,
      bluetits, bullfinches. All of them are hopping about in rough, home-made
      cages, twittering and looking with envy at the free sparrows. The
      goldfinches cost five kopecks, the siskins are rather more expensive,
      while the value of the other birds is quite indeterminate.
    

      “How much is a lark?”
    

      The seller himself does not know the value of a lark. He scratches his
      head and asks whatever comes into it, a rouble, or three kopecks,
      according to the purchaser. There are expensive birds too. A faded old
      blackbird, with most of its feathers plucked out of its tail, sits on a
      dirty perch. He is dignified, grave, and motionless as a retired general.
      He has waved his claw in resignation to his captivity long ago, and looks
      at the blue sky with indifference. Probably, owing to this indifference,
      he is considered a sagacious bird. He is not to be bought for less than
      forty kopecks. Schoolboys, workmen, young men in stylish greatcoats, and
      bird-fanciers in incredibly shabby caps, in ragged trousers that are
      turned up at the ankles, and look as though they had been gnawed by mice,
      crowd round the birds, splashing through the mud. The young people and the
      workmen are sold hens for cocks, young birds for old ones. . . . They know
      very little about birds. But there is no deceiving the bird-fancier. He
      sees and understands his bird from a distance.
    

      “There is no relying on that bird,” a fancier will say,
      looking into a siskin’s beak, and counting the feathers on its tail.
      “He sings now, it’s true, but what of that? I sing in company
      too. No, my boy, shout, sing to me without company; sing in solitude, if
      you can. . . . You give me that one yonder that sits and holds its tongue!
      Give me the quiet one! That one says nothing, so he thinks the more. . . .”
    

      Among the waggons of birds there are some full of other live creatures.
      Here you see hares, rabbits, hedgehogs, guinea-pigs, polecats. A hare sits
      sorrowfully nibbling the straw. The guinea-pigs shiver with cold, while
      the hedgehogs look out with curiosity from under their prickles at the
      public.
    

      “I have read somewhere,” says a post-office official in a
      faded overcoat, looking lovingly at the hare, and addressing no one in
      particular, “I have read that some learned man had a cat and a mouse
      and a falcon and a sparrow, who all ate out of one bowl.”
    

      “That’s very possible, sir. The cat must have been beaten, and
      the falcon, I dare say, had all its tail pulled out. There’s no
      great cleverness in that, sir. A friend of mine had a cat who, saving your
      presence, used to eat his cucumbers. He thrashed her with a big whip for a
      fortnight, till he taught her not to. A hare can learn to light matches if
      you beat it. Does that surprise you? It’s very simple! It takes the
      match in its mouth and strikes it. An animal is like a man. A man’s
      made wiser by beating, and it’s the same with a beast.”
    

      Men in long, full-skirted coats move backwards and forwards in the crowd
      with cocks and ducks under their arms. The fowls are all lean and hungry.
      Chickens poke their ugly, mangy-looking heads out of their cages and peck
      at something in the mud. Boys with pigeons stare into your face and try to
      detect in you a pigeon-fancier.
    

      “Yes, indeed! It’s no use talking to you,” someone
      shouts angrily. “You should look before you speak! Do you call this
      a pigeon? It is an eagle, not a pigeon!”
    

      A tall thin man, with a shaven upper lip and side whiskers, who looks like
      a sick and drunken footman, is selling a snow-white lap-dog. The old
      lap-dog whines.
    

      “She told me to sell the nasty thing,” says the footman, with
      a contemptuous snigger. “She is bankrupt in her old age, has nothing
      to eat, and here now is selling her dogs and cats. She cries, and kisses
      them on their filthy snouts. And then she is so hard up that she sells
      them. ‘Pon my soul, it is a fact! Buy it, gentlemen! The money is
      wanted for coffee.”
    

      But no one laughs. A boy who is standing by screws up one eye and looks at
      him gravely with compassion.
    

      The most interesting of all is the fish section. Some dozen peasants are
      sitting in a row. Before each of them is a pail, and in each pail there is
      a veritable little hell. There, in the thick, greenish water are swarms of
      little carp, eels, small fry, water-snails, frogs, and newts. Big
      water-beetles with broken legs scurry over the small surface, clambering
      on the carp, and jumping over the frogs. The creatures have a strong hold
      on life. The frogs climb on the beetles, the newts on the frogs. The dark
      green tench, as more expensive fish, enjoy an exceptional position; they
      are kept in a special jar where they can’t swim, but still they are
      not so cramped. . . .
    

      “The carp is a grand fish! The carp’s the fish to keep, your
      honour, plague take him! You can keep him for a year in a pail and he’ll
      live! It’s a week since I caught these very fish. I caught them,
      sir, in Pererva, and have come from there on foot. The carp are two
      kopecks each, the eels are three, and the minnows are ten kopecks the
      dozen, plague take them! Five kopecks’ worth of minnows, sir? Won’t
      you take some worms?”
    

      The seller thrusts his coarse rough fingers into the pail and pulls out of
      it a soft minnow, or a little carp, the size of a nail. Fishing lines,
      hooks, and tackle are laid out near the pails, and pond-worms glow with a
      crimson light in the sun.
    

      An old fancier in a fur cap, iron-rimmed spectacles, and goloshes that
      look like two dread-noughts, walks about by the waggons of birds and pails
      of fish. He is, as they call him here, “a type.” He hasn’t
      a farthing to bless himself with, but in spite of that he haggles, gets
      excited, and pesters purchasers with advice. He has thoroughly examined
      all the hares, pigeons, and fish; examined them in every detail, fixed the
      kind, the age, and the price of each one of them a good hour ago. He is as
      interested as a child in the goldfinches, the carp, and the minnows. Talk
      to him, for instance, about thrushes, and the queer old fellow will tell
      you things you could not find in any book. He will tell you them with
      enthusiasm, with passion, and will scold you too for your ignorance. Of
      goldfinches and bullfinches he is ready to talk endlessly, opening his
      eyes wide and gesticulating violently with his hands. He is only to be met
      here at the market in the cold weather; in the summer he is somewhere in
      the country, catching quails with a bird-call and angling for fish.
    

      And here is another “type,” a very tall, very thin,
      close-shaven gentleman in dark spectacles, wearing a cap with a cockade,
      and looking like a scrivener of by-gone days. He is a fancier; he is a man
      of decent position, a teacher in a high school, and that is well known to
      the habituÃ©s of the market, and they treat him with respect, greet
      him with bows, and have even invented for him a special title: “Your
      Scholarship.” At Suharev market he rummages among the books, and at
      Trubnoy looks out for good pigeons.
    

      “Please, sir!” the pigeon-sellers shout to him, “Mr.
      Schoolmaster, your Scholarship, take notice of my tumblers! your
      Scholarship!”
    

      “Your Scholarship!” is shouted at him from every side.
    

      “Your Scholarship!” an urchin repeats somewhere on the
      boulevard.
    

      And his “Scholarship,” apparently quite accustomed to his
      title, grave and severe, takes a pigeon in both hands, and lifting it
      above his head, begins examining it, and as he does so frowns and looks
      graver than ever, like a conspirator.
    

      And Trubnoy Square, that little bit of Moscow where animals are so
      tenderly loved, and where they are so tortured, lives its little life,
      grows noisy and excited, and the business-like or pious people who pass by
      along the boulevard cannot make out what has brought this crowd of people,
      this medley of caps, fur hats, and chimneypots together; what they are
      talking about there, what they are buying and selling.
    











      AN ADVENTURE
    

(A Driver’s Story)


IT was in that wood
      yonder, behind the creek, that it happened, sir. My father, the kingdom of
      Heaven be his, was taking five hundred roubles to the master; in those
      days our fellows and the Shepelevsky peasants used to rent land from the
      master, so father was taking money for the half-year. He was a God-fearing
      man, he used to read the scriptures, and as for cheating or wronging
      anyone, or defrauding —God forbid, and the peasants honoured him
      greatly, and when someone had to be sent to the town about taxes or
      such-like, or with money, they used to send him. He was a man above the
      ordinary, but, not that I’d speak ill of him, he had a weakness. He
      was fond of a drop. There was no getting him past a tavern: he would go
      in, drink a glass, and be completely done for! He was aware of this
      weakness in himself, and when he was carrying public money, that he might
      not fall asleep or lose it by some chance, he always took me or my sister
      Anyutka with him.
    

      To tell the truth, all our family have a great taste for vodka. I can read
      and write, I served for six years at a tobacconist’s in the town,
      and I can talk to any educated gentleman, and can use very fine language,
      but, it is perfectly true, sir, as I read in a book, that vodka is the
      blood of Satan. Through vodka my face has darkened. And there is nothing
      seemly about me, and here, as you may see, sir, I am a cab-driver like an
      ignorant, uneducated peasant.
    

      And so, as I was telling you, father was taking the money to the master,
      Anyutka was going with him, and at that time Anyutka was seven or maybe
      eight—a silly chit, not that high. He got as far as Kalantchiko
      successfully, he was sober, but when he reached Kalantchiko and went into
      Moiseika’s tavern, this same weakness of his came upon him. He drank
      three glasses and set to bragging before people:
    

      “I am a plain humble man,” he says, “but I have five
      hundred roubles in my pocket; if I like,” says he, “I could
      buy up the tavern and all the crockery and Moiseika and his Jewess and his
      little Jews. I can buy it all out and out,” he said. That was his
      way of joking, to be sure, but then he began complaining: “It’s
      a worry, good Christian people,” said he, “to be a rich man, a
      merchant, or anything of that kind. If you have no money you have no care,
      if you have money you must watch over your pocket the whole time that
      wicked men may not rob you. It’s a terror to live in the world for a
      man who has a lot of money.”
    

      The drunken people listened of course, took it in, and made a note of it.
      And in those days they were making a railway line at Kalantchiko, and
      there were swarms and swarms of tramps and vagabonds of all sorts like
      locusts. Father pulled himself up afterwards, but it was too late. A word
      is not a sparrow, if it flies out you can’t catch it. They drove,
      sir, by the wood, and all at once there was someone galloping on horseback
      behind them. Father was not of the chicken-hearted brigade—that I
      couldn’t say—but he felt uneasy; there was no regular road
      through the wood, nothing went that way but hay and timber, and there was
      no cause for anyone to be galloping there, particularly in working hours.
      One wouldn’t be galloping after any good.
    

      “It seems as though they are after someone,” said father to
      Anyutka, “they are galloping so furiously. I ought to have kept
      quiet in the tavern, a plague on my tongue. Oy, little daughter, my heart
      misgives me, there is something wrong!”
    

      He did not spend long in hesitation about his dangerous position, and he
      said to my sister Anyutka:
    

      “Things don’t look very bright, they really are in pursuit.
      Anyway, Anyutka dear, you take the money, put it away in your skirts, and
      go and hide behind a bush. If by ill-luck they attack me, you run back to
      mother, and give her the money. Let her take it to the village elder. Only
      mind you don’t let anyone see you; keep to the wood and by the
      creek, that no one may see you. Run your best and call on the merciful
      God. Christ be with you!”
    

      Father thrust the parcel of notes on Anyutka, and she looked out the
      thickest of the bushes and hid herself. Soon after, three men on horseback
      galloped up to father. One a stalwart, big-jawed fellow, in a crimson
      shirt and high boots, and the other two, ragged, shabby fellows, navvies
      from the line. As my father feared, so it really turned out, sir. The one
      in the crimson shirt, the sturdy, strong fellow, a man above the ordinary,
      left his horse, and all three made for my father.
    

      “Halt you, so-and-so! Where’s the money!”
    

      “What money? Go to the devil!”
    

      “Oh, the money you are taking the master for the rent. Hand it over,
      you bald devil, or we will throttle you, and you’ll die in your
      sins.”
    

      And they began to practise their villainy on father, and, instead of
      beseeching them, weeping, or anything of the sort, father got angry and
      began to reprove them with the greatest severity.
    

      “What are you pestering me for?” said he. “You are a
      dirty lot. There is no fear of God in you, plague take you! It’s not
      money you want, but a beating, to make your backs smart for three years
      after. Be off, blockheads, or I shall defend myself. I have a revolver
      that takes six bullets, it’s in my bosom!”
    

      But his words did not deter the robbers, and they began beating him with
      anything they could lay their hands on.
    

      They looked through everything in the cart, searched my father thoroughly,
      even taking off his boots; when they found that beating father only made
      him swear at them the more, they began torturing him in all sorts of ways.
      All the time Anyutka was sitting behind the bush, and she saw it all, poor
      dear. When she saw father lying on the ground and gasping, she started off
      and ran her hardest through the thicket and the creek towards home. She
      was only a little girl, with no understanding; she did not know the way,
      just ran on not knowing where she was going. It was some six miles to our
      home. Anyone else might have run there in an hour, but a little child, as
      we all know, takes two steps back for one forwards, and indeed it is not
      everyone who can run barefoot through the prickly bushes; you want to be
      used to it, too, and our girls used always to be crowding together on the
      stove or in the yard, and were afraid to run in the forest.
    

      Towards evening Anyutka somehow reached a habitation, she looked, it was a
      hut. It was the forester’s hut, in the Crown forest; some merchants
      were renting it at the time and burning charcoal. She knocked. A woman,
      the forester’s wife, came out to her. Anyutka, first of all, burst
      out crying, and told her everything just as it was, and even told her
      about the money. The forester’s wife was full of pity for her.
    

      “My poor little dear! Poor mite, God has preserved you, poor little
      one! My precious! Come into the hut, and I will give you something to eat.”
    

      She began to make up to Anyutka, gave her food and drink, and even wept
      with her, and was so attentive to her that the girl, only think, gave her
      the parcel of notes.
    

      “I will put it away, darling, and to-morrow morning I will give it
      you back and take you home, dearie.”
    

      The woman took the money, and put Anyutka to sleep on the stove where at
      the time the brooms were drying. And on the same stove, on the brooms, the
      forester’s daughter, a girl as small as our Anyutka, was asleep. And
      Anyutka used to tell us afterwards that there was such a scent from the
      brooms, they smelt of honey! Anyutka lay down, but she could not get to
      sleep, she kept crying quietly; she was sorry for father, and terrified.
      But, sir, an hour or two passed, and she saw those very three robbers who
      had tortured father walk into the hut; and the one in the crimson shirt,
      with big jaws, their leader, went up to the woman and said:
    

      “Well, wife, we have simply murdered a man for nothing. To-day we
      killed a man at dinner-time, we killed him all right, but not a farthing
      did we find.”
    

      So this fellow in the crimson shirt turned out to be the forester, the
      woman’s husband.
    

      “The man’s dead for nothing,” said his ragged
      companions. “In vain we have taken a sin on our souls.”
    

      The forester’s wife looked at all three and laughed.
    

      “What are you laughing at, silly?”
    

      “I am laughing because I haven’t murdered anyone, and I have
      not taken any sin on my soul, but I have found the money.”
    

      “What money? What nonsense are you talking!”
    

      “Here, look whether I am talking nonsense.”
    

      The forester’s wife untied the parcel and, wicked woman, showed them
      the money. Then she described how Anyutka had come, what she had said, and
      so on. The murderers were delighted and began to divide the money between
      them, they almost quarrelled, then they sat down to the table, you know,
      to drink. And Anyutka lay there, poor child, hearing every word and
      shaking like a Jew in a frying-pan. What was she to do? And from their
      words she learned that father was dead and lying across the road, and she
      fancied, in her foolishness, that the wolves and the dogs would eat
      father, and that our horse had gone far away into the forest, and would be
      eaten by wolves too, and that she, Anyutka herself, would be put in prison
      and beaten, because she had not taken care of the money. The robbers got
      drunk and sent the woman for vodka. They gave her five roubles for vodka
      and sweet wine. They set to singing and drinking on other people’s
      money. They drank and drank, the dogs, and sent the woman off again that
      they might drink beyond all bounds.
    

      “We will keep it up till morning,” they cried. “We have
      plenty of money now, there is no need to spare! Drink, and don’t
      drink away your wits.”
    

      And so at midnight, when they were all fairly fuddled, the woman ran off
      for vodka the third time, and the forester strode twice up and down the
      cottage, and he was staggering.
    

      “Look here, lads,” he said, “we must make away with the
      girl, too! If we leave her, she will be the first to bear witness against
      us.”
    

      They talked it over and discussed it, and decided that Anyutka must not be
      left alive, that she must be killed. Of course, to murder an innocent
      child’s a fearful thing, even a man drunken or crazy would not take
      such a job on himself. They were quarrelling for maybe an hour which was
      to kill her, one tried to put it on the other, they almost fought again,
      and no one would agree to do it; then they cast lots. It fell to the
      forester. He drank another full glass, cleared his throat, and went to the
      outer room for an axe.
    

      But Anyutka was a sharp wench. For all she was so simple, she thought of
      something that, I must say, not many an educated man would have thought
      of. Maybe the Lord had compassion on her, and gave her sense for the
      moment, or perhaps it was the fright sharpened her wits, anyway when it
      came to the test it turned out that she was cleverer than anyone. She got
      up stealthily, prayed to God, took the little sheepskin, the one the
      forester’s wife had put over her, and, you understand, the forester’s
      little daughter, a girl of the same age as herself, was lying on the stove
      beside her. She covered this girl with the sheepskin, and took the woman’s
      jacket off her and threw it over herself. Disguised herself, in fact. She
      put it over her head, and so walked across the hut by the drunken men, and
      they thought it was the forester’s daughter, and did not even look
      at her. Luckily for her the woman was not in the hut, she had gone for
      vodka, or maybe she would not have escaped the axe, for a woman’s
      eyes are as far-seeing as a buzzard’s. A woman’s eyes are
      sharp.
    

      Anyutka came out of the hut, and ran as fast as her legs could carry her.
      All night she was lost in the forest, but towards morning she came out to
      the edge and ran along the road. By the mercy of God she met the clerk
      Yegor Danilitch, the kingdom of Heaven be his. He was going along with his
      hooks to catch fish. Anyutka told him all about it. He went back quicker
      than he came—thought no more of the fish—gathered the peasants
      together in the village, and off they went to the forester’s.
    

      They got there, and all the murderers were lying side by side, dead drunk,
      each where he had fallen; the woman, too, was drunk. First thing they
      searched them; they took the money and then looked on the stove—the
      Holy Cross be with us! The forester’s child was lying on the brooms,
      under the sheepskin, and her head was in a pool of blood, chopped off by
      the axe. They roused the peasants and the woman, tied their hands behind
      them, and took them to the district court; the woman howled, but the
      forester only shook his head and asked:
    

      “You might give me a drop, lads! My head aches!”
    

      Afterwards they were tried in the town in due course, and punished with
      the utmost rigour of the law.
    

      So that’s what happened, sir, beyond the forest there, that lies
      behind the creek. Now you can scarcely see it, the sun is setting red
      behind it. I have been talking to you, and the horses have stopped, as
      though they were listening too. Hey there, my beauties! Move more briskly,
      the good gentleman will give us something extra. Hey, you darlings!
    











      THE FISH
    

A SUMMER morning.
      The air is still; there is no sound but the churring of a grasshopper on
      the river bank, and somewhere the timid cooing of a turtle-dove. Feathery
      clouds stand motionless in the sky, looking like snow scattered about. . .
      . Gerassim, the carpenter, a tall gaunt peasant, with a curly red head and
      a face overgrown with hair, is floundering about in the water under the
      green willow branches near an unfinished bathing shed. . . . He puffs and
      pants and, bDlinking furiously, is trying to get hold of something under
      the roots of the willows. His face is covered with perspiration. A couple
      of yards from him, Lubim, the carpenter, a young hunchback with a
      triangular face and narrow Chinese-looking eyes, is standing up to his
      neck in water. Both Gerassim and Lubim are in shirts and linen breeches.
      Both are blue with cold, for they have been more than an hour already in
      the water.
    

      “But why do you keep poking with your hand?” cries the
      hunchback Lubim, shivering as though in a fever. “You blockhead!
      Hold him, hold him, or else he’ll get away, the anathema! Hold him,
      I tell you!”
    

      “He won’t get away. . . . Where can he get to? He’s
      under a root,” says Gerassim in a hoarse, hollow bass, which seems
      to come not from his throat, but from the depths of his stomach. “He’s
      slippery, the beggar, and there’s nothing to catch hold of.”
    

      “Get him by the gills, by the gills!”
    

      “There’s no seeing his gills. . . . Stay, I’ve got hold
      of something . . . . I’ve got him by the lip. . . He’s biting,
      the brute!”
    

      “Don’t pull him out by the lip, don’t—or you’ll
      let him go! Take him by the gills, take him by the gills. . . . You’ve
      begun poking with your hand again! You are a senseless man, the Queen of
      Heaven forgive me! Catch hold!”
    

      “Catch hold!” Gerassim mimics him. “You’re a fine
      one to give orders . . . . You’d better come and catch hold of him
      yourself, you hunchback devil. . . . What are you standing there for?”
    

      “I would catch hold of him if it were possible. But can I stand by
      the bank, and me as short as I am? It’s deep there.”
    

      “It doesn’t matter if it is deep. . . . You must swim.”
    

      The hunchback waves his arms, swims up to Gerassim, and catches hold of
      the twigs. At the first attempt to stand up, he goes into the water over
      his head and begins blowing up bubbles.
    

      “I told you it was deep,” he says, rolling his eyes angrily.
      “Am I to sit on your neck or what?”
    

      “Stand on a root . . . there are a lot of roots like a ladder.”
      The hunchback gropes for a root with his heel, and tightly gripping
      several twigs, stands on it. . . . Having got his balance, and established
      himself in his new position, he bends down, and trying not to get the
      water into his mouth, begins fumbling with his right hand among the roots.
      Getting entangled among the weeds and slipping on the mossy roots he finds
      his hand in contact with the sharp pincers of a crayfish.
    

      “As though we wanted to see you, you demon!” says Lubim, and
      he angrily flings the crayfish on the bank.
    

      At last his hand feels Gerassim’ s arm, and groping its way along it
      comes to something cold and slimy.
    

      “Here he is!” says Lubim with a grin. “A fine fellow!
      Move your fingers, I’ll get him directly . . . by the gills. Stop,
      don’t prod me with your elbow. . . . I’ll have him in a
      minute, in a minute, only let me get hold of him. . . . The beggar has got
      a long way under the roots, there is nothing to get hold of. . . . One can’t
      get to the head . . . one can only feel its belly . . . . kill that gnat
      on my neck—it’s stinging! I’ll get him by the gills,
      directly . . . . Come to one side and give him a push! Poke him with your
      finger!”
    

      The hunchback puffs out his cheeks, holds his breath, opens his eyes wide,
      and apparently has already got his fingers in the gills, but at that
      moment the twigs to which he is holding on with his left hand break, and
      losing his balance he plops into the water! Eddies race away from the bank
      as though frightened, and little bubbles come up from the spot where he
      has fallen in. The hunchback swims out and, snorting, clutches at the
      twigs.
    

      “You’ll be drowned next, you stupid, and I shall have to
      answer for you,” wheezes Gerassim. “Clamber out, the devil
      take you! I’ll get him out myself.”
    

      High words follow. . . . The sun is baking hot. The shadows begin to grow
      shorter and to draw in on themselves, like the horns of a snail. . . . The
      high grass warmed by the sun begins to give out a strong, heavy smell of
      honey. It will soon be midday, and Gerassim and Lubim are still
      floundering under the willow tree. The husky bass and the shrill, frozen
      tenor persistently disturb the stillness of the summer day.
    

      “Pull him out by the gills, pull him out! Stay, I’ll push him
      out! Where are you shoving your great ugly fist? Poke him with your finger—you
      pig’s face! Get round by the side! get to the left, to the left,
      there’s a big hole on the right! You’ll be a supper for the
      water-devil! Pull it by the lip!”
    

      There is the sound of the flick of a whip. . . . A herd of cattle, driven
      by Yefim, the shepherd, saunter lazily down the sloping bank to drink. The
      shepherd, a decrepit old man, with one eye and a crooked mouth, walks with
      his head bowed, looking at his feet. The first to reach the water are the
      sheep, then come the horses, and last of all the cows.
    

      “Push him from below!” he hears Lubim’s voice. “Stick
      your finger in! Are you deaf, fellow, or what? Tfoo!”
    

      “What are you after, lads?” shouts Yefim.
    

      “An eel-pout! We can’t get him out! He’s hidden under
      the roots. Get round to the side! To the side!”
    

      For a minute Yefim screws up his eye at the fishermen, then he takes off
      his bark shoes, throws his sack off his shoulders, and takes off his
      shirt. He has not the patience to take off his breeches, but, making the
      sign of the cross, he steps into the water, holding out his thin dark arms
      to balance himself. . . . For fifty paces he walks along the slimy bottom,
      then he takes to swimming.
    

      “Wait a minute, lads!” he shouts. “Wait! Don’t be
      in a hurry to pull him out, you’ll lose him. You must do it
      properly!”
    

      Yefim joins the carpenters and all three, shoving each other with their
      knees and their elbows, puffing and swearing at one another, bustle about
      the same spot. Lubim, the hunchback, gets a mouthful of water, and the air
      rings with his hard spasmodic coughing.
    

      “Where’s the shepherd?” comes a shout from the bank.
      “Yefim! Shepherd! Where are you? The cattle are in the garden! Drive
      them out, drive them out of the garden! Where is he, the old brigand?”
    

      First men’s voices are heard, then a woman’s. The master
      himself, Andrey Andreitch, wearing a dressing-gown made of a Persian shawl
      and carrying a newspaper in his hand, appears from behind the garden
      fence. He looks inquiringly towards the shouts which come from the river,
      and then trips rapidly towards the bathing shed.
    

      “What’s this? Who’s shouting?” he asks sternly,
      seeing through the branches of the willow the three wet heads of the
      fishermen. “What are you so busy about there?”
    

      “Catching a fish,” mutters Yefim, without raising his head.
    

      “I’ll give it to you! The beasts are in the garden and he is
      fishing! . . . When will that bathing shed be done, you devils? You’ve
      been at work two days, and what is there to show for it?”
    

      “It . . . will soon be done,” grunts Gerassim; summer is long,
      you’ll have plenty of time to wash, your honour. . . . Pfrrr! . . .
      We can’t manage this eel-pout here anyhow. . . . He’s got
      under a root and sits there as if he were in a hole and won’t budge
      one way or another . . . .”
    

      “An eel-pout?” says the master, and his eyes begin to glisten.
      “Get him out quickly then.”
    

      “You’ll give us half a rouble for it presently if we oblige
      you . . . . A huge eel-pout, as fat as a merchant’s wife. . . . It’s
      worth half a rouble, your honour, for the trouble. . . . Don’t
      squeeze him, Lubim, don’t squeeze him, you’ll spoil him! Push
      him up from below! Pull the root upwards, my good man . . . what’s
      your name? Upwards, not downwards, you brute! Don’t swing your legs!”
    

      Five minutes pass, ten. . . . The master loses all patience.
    

      “Vassily!” he shouts, turning towards the garden. “Vaska!
      Call Vassily to me!”
    

      The coachman Vassily runs up. He is chewing something and breathing hard.
    

      “Go into the water,” the master orders him. “Help them
      to pull out that eel-pout. They can’t get him out.”
    

      Vassily rapidly undresses and gets into the water.
    

      “In a minute. . . . I’ll get him in a minute,” he
      mutters. “Where’s the eel-pout? We’ll have him out in a
      trice! You’d better go, Yefim. An old man like you ought to be
      minding his own business instead of being here. Where’s that
      eel-pout? I’ll have him in a minute . . . . Here he is! Let go.”
    

      “What’s the good of saying that? We know all about that! You
      get it out!”
    

      But there is no getting it out like this! One must get hold of it by the
      head.”
    

      “And the head is under the root! We know that, you fool!”
    

      “Now then, don’t talk or you’ll catch it! You dirty cur!”
    

      “Before the master to use such language,” mutters Yefim.
      “You won’t get him out, lads! He’s fixed himself much
      too cleverly!”
    

      “Wait a minute, I’ll come directly,” says the master,
      and he begins hurriedly undressing. “Four fools, and can’t get
      an eel-pout!”
    

      When he is undressed, Andrey Andreitch gives himself time to cool and gets
      into the water. But even his interference leads to nothing.
    

      “We must chop the root off,” Lubim decides at last. “Gerassim,
      go and get an axe! Give me an axe!”
    

      “Don’t chop your fingers off,” says the master, when the
      blows of the axe on the root under water are heard. “Yefim, get out
      of this! Stay, I’ll get the eel-pout. . . . You’ll never do
      it.”
    

      The root is hacked a little. They partly break it off, and Andrey
      Andreitch, to his immense satisfaction, feels his fingers under the gills
      of the fish.
    

      “I’m pulling him out, lads! Don’t crowd round . . .
      stand still . . . . I am pulling him out!”
    

      The head of a big eel-pout, and behind it its long black body, nearly a
      yard long, appears on the surface of the water. The fish flaps its tail
      heavily and tries to tear itself away.
    

      “None of your nonsense, my boy! Fiddlesticks! I’ve got you!
      Aha!”
    

      A honied smile overspreads all the faces. A minute passes in silent
      contemplation.
    

      “A famous eel-pout,” mutters Yefim, scratching under his
      shoulder-blades. “I’ll be bound it weighs ten pounds.”
    

      “Mm! . . . Yes,” the master assents. “The liver is
      fairly swollen! It seems to stand out! A-ach!”
    

      The fish makes a sudden, unexpected upward movement with its tail and the
      fishermen hear a loud splash . . . they all put out their hands, but it is
      too late; they have seen the last of the eel-pout.
    











      ART
    

      A GLOOMY winter morning.
    

On the smooth and
      glittering surface of the river Bystryanka, sprinkled here and there with
      snow, stand two peasants, scrubby little Seryozhka and the church beadle,
      Matvey. Seryozhka, a short-legged, ragged, mangy-looking fellow of thirty,
      stares angrily at the ice. Tufts of wool hang from his shaggy sheepskin
      like a mangy dog. In his hands he holds a compass made of two pointed
      sticks. Matvey, a fine-looking old man in a new sheepskin and high felt
      boots, looks with mild blue eyes upwards where on the high sloping bank a
      village nestles picturesquely. In his hands there is a heavy crowbar.
    

      “Well, are we going to stand like this till evening with our arms
      folded?” says Seryozhka, breaking the silence and turning his angry
      eyes on Matvey. “Have you come here to stand about, old fool, or to
      work?”
    

      “Well, you . . . er . . . show me . . .” Matvey mutters,
      bDlinking mildly.
    

      “Show you. . . . It’s always me: me to show you, and me to do
      it. They have no sense of their own! Mark it out with the compasses, that’s
      what’s wanted! You can’t break the ice without marking it out.
      Mark it! Take the compass.”
    

      Matvey takes the compasses from Seryozhka’s hands, and, shuffling
      heavily on the same spot and jerking with his elbows in all directions, he
      begins awkwardly trying to describe a circle on the ice. Seryozhka screws
      up his eyes contemptuously and obviously enjoys his awkwardness and
      incompetence.
    

      “Eh-eh-eh!” he mutters angrily. “Even that you can’t
      do! The fact is you are a stupid peasant, a wooden-head! You ought to be
      grazing geese and not making a Jordan! Give the compasses here! Give them
      here, I say!”
    

      Seryozhka snatches the compasses out of the hands of the perspiring
      Matvey, and in an instant, jauntily twirling round on one heel, he
      describes a circle on the ice. The outline of the new Jordan is ready now,
      all that is left to do is to break the ice. . .
    

      But before proceeding to the work Seryozhka spends a long time in airs and
      graces, whims and reproaches. . .
    

      “I am not obliged to work for you! You are employed in the church,
      you do it!”
    

      He obviously enjoys the peculiar position in which he has been placed by
      the fate that has bestowed on him the rare talent of surprising the whole
      parish once a year by his art. Poor mild Matvey has to listen to many
      venomous and contemptuous words from him. Seryozhka sets to work with
      vexation, with anger. He is lazy. He has hardly described the circle when
      he is already itching to go up to the village to drink tea, lounge about,
      and babble. . .
    

      “I’ll be back directly,” he says, lighting his
      cigarette, “and meanwhile you had better bring something to sit on
      and sweep up, instead of standing there counting the crows.”
    

      Matvey is left alone. The air is grey and harsh but still. The white
      church peeps out genially from behind the huts scattered on the river
      bank. Jackdaws are incessantly circling round its golden crosses. On one
      side of the village where the river bank breaks off and is steep a hobbled
      horse is standing at the very edge, motionless as a stone, probably asleep
      or deep in thought.
    

      Matvey, too, stands motionless as a statue, waiting patiently. The
      dreamily brooding look of the river, the circling of the jackdaws, and the
      sight of the horse make him drowsy. One hour passes, a second, and still
      Seryozhka does not come. The river has long been swept and a box brought
      to sit on, but the drunken fellow does not appear. Matvey waits and merely
      yawns. The feeling of boredom is one of which he knows nothing. If he were
      told to stand on the river for a day, a month, or a year he would stand
      there.
    

      At last Seryozhka comes into sight from behind the huts. He walks with a
      lurching gait, scarcely moving. He is too lazy to go the long way round,
      and he comes not by the road, but prefers a short cut in a straight line
      down the bank, and sticks in the snow, hangs on to the bushes, slides on
      his back as he comes—and all this slowly, with pauses.
    

      “What are you about?” he cries, falling on Matvey at once.
      “Why are you standing there doing nothing! When are you going to
      break the ice?”
    

      Matvey crosses himself, takes the crowbar in both hands, and begins
      breaking the ice, carefully keeping to the circle that has been drawn.
      Seryozhka sits down on the box and watches the heavy clumsy movements of
      his assistant.
    

      “Easy at the edges! Easy there!” he commands. “If you
      can’t do it properly, you shouldn’t undertake it, once you
      have undertaken it you should do it. You!”
    

      A crowd collects on the top of the bank. At the sight of the spectators
      Seryozhka becomes even more excited.
    

      “I declare I am not going to do it . . .” he says, lighting a
      stinking cigarette and spitting on the ground. “I should like to see
      how you get on without me. Last year at Kostyukovo, Styopka Gulkov
      undertook to make a Jordan as I do. And what did it amount to—it was
      a laughing-stock. The Kostyukovo folks came to ours —crowds and
      crowds of them! The people flocked from all the villages.”
    

      “Because except for ours there is nowhere a proper Jordan . . .”
    

      “Work, there is no time for talking. . . . Yes, old man . . . you
      won’t find another Jordan like it in the whole province. The
      soldiers say you would look in vain, they are not so good even in the
      towns. Easy, easy!”
    

      Matvey puffs and groans. The work is not easy. The ice is firm and thick;
      and he has to break it and at once take the pieces away that the open
      space may not be blocked up.
    

      But, hard as the work is and senseless as Seryozhka’s commands are,
      by three o’clock there is a large circle of dark water in the
      Bystryanka.
    

      “It was better last year,” says Seryozhka angrily. “You
      can’t do even that! Ah, dummy! To keep such fools in the temple of
      God! Go and bring a board to make the pegs! Bring the ring, you crow! And
      er . . . get some bread somewhere . . . and some cucumbers, or something.”
    

      Matvey goes off and soon afterwards comes back, carrying on his shoulders
      an immense wooden ring which had been painted in previous years in
      patterns of various colours. In the centre of the ring is a red cross, at
      the circumference holes for the pegs. Seryozhka takes the ring and covers
      the hole in the ice with it.
    

      “Just right . . . it fits. . . . We have only to renew the paint and
      it will be first-rate. . . . Come, why are you standing still? Make the
      lectern. Or—er—go and get logs to make the cross . . .”
    

      Matvey, who has not tasted food or drink all day, trudges up the hill
      again. Lazy as Seryozhka is, he makes the pegs with his own hands. He
      knows that those pegs have a miraculous power: whoever gets hold of a peg
      after the blessing of the water will be lucky for the whole year. Such
      work is really worth doing.
    

      But the real work begins the following day. Then Seryozhka displays
      himself before the ignorant Matvey in all the greatness of his talent.
      There is no end to his babble, his fault-finding, his whims and fancies.
      If Matvey nails two big pieces of wood to make a cross, he is dissatisfied
      and tells him to do it again. If Matvey stands still, Seryozhka asks him
      angrily why he does not go; if he moves, Seryozhka shouts to him not to go
      away but to do his work. He is not satisfied with his tools, with the
      weather, or with his own talent; nothing pleases him.
    

      Matvey saws out a great piece of ice for a lectern.
    

      “Why have you broken off the corner?” cries Seryozhka, and
      glares at him furiously. “Why have you broken off the corner? I ask
      you.”
    

      “Forgive me, for Christ’s sake.”
    

      “Do it over again!”
    

      Matvey saws again . . . and there is no end to his sufferings. A lectern
      is to stand by the hole in the ice that is covered by the painted ring; on
      the lectern is to be carved the cross and the open gospel. But that is not
      all. Behind the lectern there is to be a high cross to be seen by all the
      crowd and to glitter in the sun as though sprinkled with diamonds and
      rubies. On the cross is to be a dove carved out of ice. The path from the
      church to the Jordan is to be strewn with branches of fir and juniper. All
      this is their task.
    

      First of all Seryozhka sets to work on the lectern. He works with a file,
      a chisel, and an awl. He is perfectly successful in the cross on the
      lectern, the gospel, and the drapery that hangs down from the lectern.
      Then he begins on the dove. While he is trying to carve an expression of
      meekness and humility on the face of the dove, Matvey, lumbering about
      like a bear, is coating with ice the cross he has made of wood. He takes
      the cross and dips it in the hole. Waiting till the water has frozen on
      the cross he dips it in a second time, and so on till the cross is covered
      with a thick layer of ice. It is a difficult job, calling for a great deal
      of strength and patience.
    

      But now the delicate work is finished. Seryozhka races about the village
      like one possessed. He swears and vows he will go at once to the river and
      smash all his work. He is looking for suitable paints.
    

      His pockets are full of ochre, dark blue, red lead, and verdigris; without
      paying a farthing he rushes headlong from one shop to another. The shop is
      next door to the tavern. Here he has a drink; with a wave of his hand he
      darts off without paying. At one hut he gets beetroot leaves, at another
      an onion skin, out of which he makes a yellow colour. He swears, shoves,
      threatens, and not a soul murmurs! They all smile at him, they sympathise
      with him, call him Sergey Nikititch; they all feel that his art is not his
      personal affair but something that concerns them all, the whole people.
      One creates, the others help him. Seryozhka in himself is a nonentity, a
      sluggard, a drunkard, and a wastrel, but when he has his red lead or
      compasses in his hand he is at once something higher, a servant of God.
    

      Epiphany morning comes. The precincts of the church and both banks of the
      river for a long distance are swarming with people. Everything that makes
      up the Jordan is scrupulously concealed under new mats. Seryozhka is
      meekly moving about near the mats, trying to control his emotion. He sees
      thousands of people. There are many here from other parishes; these people
      have come many a mile on foot through the frost and the snow merely to see
      his celebrated Jordan. Matvey, who had finished his coarse, rough work, is
      by now back in the church, there is no sight, no sound of him; he is
      already forgotten . . . . The weather is lovely. . . . There is not a
      cloud in the sky. The sunshine is dazzling.
    

      The church bells ring out on the hill . . . Thousands of heads are bared,
      thousands of hands are moving, there are thousands of signs of the cross!
    

      And Seryozhka does not know what to do with himself for impatience. But
      now they are ringing the bells for the Sacrament; then half an hour later
      a certain agitation is perceptible in the belfry and among the people.
      Banners are borne out of the church one after the other, while the bells
      peal in joyous haste. Seryozhka, trembling, pulls away the mat . . . and
      the people behold something extraordinary. The lectern, the wooden ring,
      the pegs, and the cross in the ice are iridescent with thousands of
      colors. The cross and the dove glitter so dazzlingly that it hurts the
      eyes to look at them. Merciful God, how fine it is! A murmur of wonder and
      delight runs through the crowd; the bells peal more loudly still, the day
      grows brighter; the banners oscillate and move over the crowd as over the
      waves. The procession, glittering with the settings of the ikons and the
      vestments of the clergy, comes slowly down the road and turns towards the
      Jordan. Hands are waved to the belfry for the ringing to cease, and the
      blessing of the water begins. The priests conduct the service slowly,
      deliberately, evidently trying to prolong the ceremony and the joy of
      praying all gathered together. There is perfect stillness.
    

      But now they plunge the cross in, and the air echoes with an extraordinary
      din. Guns are fired, the bells peal furiously, loud exclamations of
      delight, shouts, and a rush to get the pegs. Seryozhka listens to this
      uproar, sees thousands of eyes fixed upon him, and the lazy fellow’s
      soul is filled with a sense of glory and triumph.
    











      THE SWEDISH MATCH
    

(The Story of a Crime)


      I
    

ON the morning of
      October 6, 1885, a well-dressed young man presented himself at the office
      of the police superintendent of the 2nd division of the S. district, and
      announced that his employer, a retired cornet of the guards, called Mark
      Ivanovitch Klyauzov, had been murdered. The young man was pale and
      extremely agitated as he made this announcement. His hands trembled and
      there was a look of horror in his eyes.
    

      “To whom have I the honour of speaking?” the superintendent
      asked him.
    

      “Psyekov, Klyauzov’s steward. Agricultural and engineering
      expert.”
    

      The police superintendent, on reaching the spot with Psyekov and the
      necessary witnesses, found the position as follows.
    

      Masses of people were crowding about the lodge in which Klyauzov lived.
      The news of the event had flown round the neighbourhood with the rapidity
      of lightning, and, thanks to its being a holiday, the people were flocking
      to the lodge from all the neighbouring villages. There was a regular
      hubbub of talk. Pale and tearful faces were to be seen here and there. The
      door into Klyauzov’s bedroom was found to be locked. The key was in
      the lock on the inside.
    

      “Evidently the criminals made their way in by the window”
      Psyekov observed, as they examined the door.
    

      They went into the garden into which the bedroom window looked. The window
      had a gloomy, ominous air. It was covered by a faded green curtain. One
      corner of the curtain was slightly turned back, which made it possible to
      peep into the bedroom.
    

      “Has anyone of you looked in at the window?” inquired the
      superintendent.
    

      “No, your honour,” said Yefrem, the gardener, a little,
      grey-haired old man with the face of a veteran non-commissioned officer.
      “No one feels like looking when they are shaking in every limb!”
    

      “Ech, Mark Ivanitch! Mark Ivanitch!” sighed the
      superintendent, as he looked at the window. “I told you that you
      would come to a bad end! I told you, poor dear—you wouldn’t
      listen! Dissipation leads to no good!”
    

      “It’s thanks to Yefrem,” said Psyekov. “We should
      never have guessed it but for him. It was he who first thought that
      something was wrong. He came to me this morning and said: ‘Why is it
      our master hasn’t waked up for so long? He hasn’t been out of
      his bedroom for a whole week! When he said that to me I was struck all of
      a heap . . . . The thought flashed through my mind at once. He hasn’t
      made an appearance since Saturday of last week, and to-day’s Sunday.
      Seven days is no joke!”
    

      “Yes, poor man,” the superintendent sighed again. “A
      clever fellow, well-educated, and so good-hearted. There was no one like
      him, one may say, in company. But a rake; the kingdom of heaven be his! I’m
      not surprised at anything with him! Stepan,” he said, addressing one
      of the witnesses, “ride off this minute to my house and send
      Andryushka to the police captain’s, let him report to him. Say Mark
      Ivanitch has been murdered! Yes, and run to the inspector—why should
      he sit in comfort doing nothing? Let him come here. And you go yourself as
      fast as you can to the examining magistrate, Nikolay Yermolaitch, and tell
      him to come here. Wait a bit, I will write him a note.”
    

      The police superintendent stationed watchmen round the lodge, and went off
      to the steward’s to have tea. Ten minutes later he was sitting on a
      stool, carefully nibbling lumps of sugar, and sipping tea as hot as a
      red-hot coal.
    

      “There it is! . . .” he said to Psyekov, “there it is! .
      . . a gentleman, and a well-to-do one, too . . . a favourite of the gods,
      one may say, to use Pushkin’s expression, and what has he made of
      it? Nothing! He gave himself up to drinking and debauchery, and . . . here
      now . . . he has been murdered!”
    

      Two hours later the examining magistrate drove up. Nikolay Yermolaitch
      Tchubikov (that was the magistrate’s name), a tall, thick-set old
      man of sixty, had been hard at work for a quarter of a century. He was
      known to the whole district as an honest, intelligent, energetic man,
      devoted to his work. His invariable companion, assistant, and secretary, a
      tall young man of six and twenty, called Dyukovsky, arrived on the scene
      of action with him.
    

      “Is it possible, gentlemen?” Tchubikov began, going into
      Psyekov’s room and rapidly shaking hands with everyone. “Is it
      possible? Mark Ivanitch? Murdered? No, it’s impossible!
      Imposs-i-ble!”
    

      “There it is,” sighed the superintendent
    

      “Merciful heavens! Why I saw him only last Friday. At the fair at
      Tarabankovo! Saving your presence, I drank a glass of vodka with him!”
    

      “There it is,” the superintendent sighed once more.
    

      They heaved sighs, expressed their horror, drank a glass of tea each, and
      went to the lodge.
    

      “Make way!” the police inspector shouted to the crowd.
    

      On going into the lodge the examining magistrate first of all set to work
      to inspect the door into the bedroom. The door turned out to be made of
      deal, painted yellow, and not to have been tampered with. No special
      traces that might have served as evidence could be found. They proceeded
      to break open the door.
    

      “I beg you, gentlemen, who are not concerned, to retire,” said
      the examining magistrate, when, after long banging and cracking, the door
      yielded to the axe and the chisel. “I ask this in the interests of
      the investigation. . . . Inspector, admit no one!”
    

      Tchubikov, his assistant, and the police superintendent opened the door
      and hesitatingly, one after the other, walked into the room. The following
      spectacle met their eyes. In the solitary window stood a big wooden
      bedstead with an immense feather bed on it. On the rumpled feather bed lay
      a creased and crumpled quilt. A pillow, in a cotton pillow case—also
      much creased, was on the floor. On a little table beside the bed lay a
      silver watch, and silver coins to the value of twenty kopecks. Some
      sulphur matches lay there too. Except the bed, the table, and a solitary
      chair, there was no furniture in the room. Looking under the bed, the
      superintendent saw two dozen empty bottles, an old straw hat, and a jar of
      vodka. Under the table lay one boot, covered with dust. Taking a look
      round the room, Tchubikov frowned and flushed crimson.
    

      “The blackguards!” he muttered, clenching his fists.
    

      “And where is Mark Ivanitch?” Dyukovsky asked quietly.
    

      “I beg you not to put your spoke in,” Tchubikov answered
      roughly. “Kindly examine the floor. This is the second case in my
      experience, Yevgraf Kuzmitch,” he added to the police
      superintendent, dropping his voice. “In 1870 I had a similar case.
      But no doubt you remember it. . . . The murder of the merchant Portretov.
      It was just the same. The blackguards murdered him, and dragged the dead
      body out of the window.”
    

      Tchubikov went to the window, drew the curtain aside, and cautiously
      pushed the window. The window opened.
    

      “It opens, so it was not fastened. . . . H’m there are traces
      on the window-sill. Do you see? Here is the trace of a knee. . . . Some
      one climbed out. . . . We shall have to inspect the window thoroughly.”
    

      “There is nothing special to be observed on the floor,” said
      Dyukovsky. “No stains, nor scratches. The only thing I have found is
      a used Swedish match. Here it is. As far as I remember, Mark Ivanitch didn’t
      smoke; in a general way he used sulphur ones, never Swedish matches. This
      match may serve as a clue. . . .”
    

      “Oh, hold your tongue, please!” cried Tchubikov, with a wave
      of his hand. “He keeps on about his match! I can’t stand these
      excitable people! Instead of looking for matches, you had better examine
      the bed!”
    

      On inspecting the bed, Dyukovsky reported:
    

      “There are no stains of blood or of anything else. . . . Nor are
      there any fresh rents. On the pillow there are traces of teeth. A liquid,
      having the smell of beer and also the taste of it, has been spilt on the
      quilt. . . . The general appearance of the bed gives grounds for supposing
      there has been a struggle.”
    

      “I know there was a struggle without your telling me! No one asked
      you whether there was a struggle. Instead of looking out for a struggle
      you had better be . . .”
    

      “One boot is here, the other one is not on the scene.”
    

      “Well, what of that?”
    

      “Why, they must have strangled him while he was taking off his
      boots. He hadn’t time to take the second boot off when . . . .”
    

      “He’s off again! . . . And how do you know that he was
      strangled?”
    

      “There are marks of teeth on the pillow. The pillow itself is very
      much crumpled, and has been flung to a distance of six feet from the bed.”
    

      “He argues, the chatterbox! We had better go into the garden. You
      had better look in the garden instead of rummaging about here. . . . I can
      do that without your help.”
    

      When they went out into the garden their first task was the inspection of
      the grass. The grass had been trampled down under the windows. The clump
      of burdock against the wall under the window turned out to have been
      trodden on too. Dyukovsky succeeded in finding on it some broken shoots,
      and a little bit of wadding. On the topmost burrs, some fine threads of
      dark blue wool were found.
    

      “What was the colour of his last suit? Dyukovsky asked Psyekov.
    

      “It was yellow, made of canvas.”
    

      “Capital! Then it was they who were in dark blue. . . .”
    

      Some of the burrs were cut off and carefully wrapped up in paper. At that
      moment Artsybashev-Svistakovsky, the police captain, and Tyutyuev, the
      doctor, arrived. The police captain greeted the others, and at once
      proceeded to satisfy his curiosity; the doctor, a tall and extremely lean
      man with sunken eyes, a long nose, and a sharp chin, greeting no one and
      asking no questions, sat down on a stump, heaved a sigh and said:
    

      “The Serbians are in a turmoil again! I can’t make out what
      they want! Ah, Austria, Austria! It’s your doing!”
    

      The inspection of the window from outside yielded absolutely no result;
      the inspection of the grass and surrounding bushes furnished many valuable
      clues. Dyukovsky succeeded, for instance, in detecting a long, dark streak
      in the grass, consisting of stains, and stretching from the window for a
      good many yards into the garden. The streak ended under one of the lilac
      bushes in a big, brownish stain. Under the same bush was found a boot,
      which turned out to be the fellow to the one found in the bedroom.
    

      “This is an old stain of blood,” said Dyukovsky, examining the
      stain.
    

      At the word “blood,” the doctor got up and lazily took a
      cursory glance at the stain.
    

      “Yes, it’s blood,” he muttered.
    

      “Then he wasn’t strangled since there’s blood,”
      said Tchubikov, looking malignantly at Dyukovsky.
    

      “He was strangled in the bedroom, and here, afraid he would come to,
      they stabbed him with something sharp. The stain under the bush shows that
      he lay there for a comparatively long time, while they were trying to find
      some way of carrying him, or something to carry him on out of the garden.”
    

      “Well, and the boot?”
    

      “That boot bears out my contention that he was murdered while he was
      taking off his boots before going to bed. He had taken off one boot, the
      other, that is, this boot he had only managed to get half off. While he
      was being dragged and shaken the boot that was only half on came off of
      itself. . . .”
    

      “What powers of deduction! Just look at him!” Tchubikov
      jeered. “He brings it all out so pat! And when will you learn not to
      put your theories forward? You had better take a little of the grass for
      analysis instead of arguing!”
    

      After making the inspection and taking a plan of the locality they went
      off to the steward’s to write a report and have lunch. At lunch they
      talked.
    

      “Watch, money, and everything else . . . are untouched,”
      Tchubikov began the conversation. “It is as clear as twice two makes
      four that the murder was committed not for mercenary motives.”
    

      “It was committed by a man of the educated class,” Dyukovsky
      put in.
    

      “From what do you draw that conclusion?”
    

      “I base it on the Swedish match which the peasants about here have
      not learned to use yet. Such matches are only used by landowners and not
      by all of them. He was murdered, by the way, not by one but by three, at
      least: two held him while the third strangled him. Klyauzov was strong and
      the murderers must have known that.”
    

      “What use would his strength be to him, supposing he were asleep?”
    

      “The murderers came upon him as he was taking off his boots. He was
      taking off his boots, so he was not asleep.”
    

      “It’s no good making things up! You had better eat your lunch!”
    

      “To my thinking, your honour,” said Yefrem, the gardener, as
      he set the samovar on the table, “this vile deed was the work of no
      other than Nikolashka.”
    

      “Quite possible,” said Psyekov.
    

      “Who’s this Nikolashka?”
    

      “The master’s valet, your honour,” answered Yefrem.
      “Who else should it be if not he? He’s a ruffian, your honour!
      A drunkard, and such a dissipated fellow! May the Queen of Heaven never
      bring the like again! He always used to fetch vodka for the master, he
      always used to put the master to bed. . . . Who should it be if not he?
      And what’s more, I venture to bring to your notice, your honour, he
      boasted once in a tavern, the rascal, that he would murder his master. It’s
      all on account of Akulka, on account of a woman. . . . He had a soldier’s
      wife. . . . The master took a fancy to her and got intimate with her, and
      he . . . was angered by it, to be sure. He’s lolling about in the
      kitchen now, drunk. He’s crying . . . making out he is grieving over
      the master . . . .”
    

      “And anyone might be angry over Akulka, certainly,” said
      Psyekov. “She is a soldier’s wife, a peasant woman, but . . .
      Mark Ivanitch might well call her Nana. There is something in her that
      does suggest Nana . . . fascinating . . .”
    

      “I have seen her . . . I know . . .” said the examining
      magistrate, blowing his nose in a red handkerchief.
    

      Dyukovsky blushed and dropped his eyes. The police superintendent drummed
      on his saucer with his fingers. The police captain coughed and rummaged in
      his portfolio for something. On the doctor alone the mention of Akulka and
      Nana appeared to produce no impression. Tchubikov ordered Nikolashka to be
      fetched. Nikolashka, a lanky young man with a long pock-marked nose and a
      hollow chest, wearing a reefer jacket that had been his master’s,
      came into Psyekov’s room and bowed down to the ground before
      Tchubikov. His face looked sleepy and showed traces of tears. He was drunk
      and could hardly stand up.
    

      “Where is your master?” Tchubikov asked him.
    

      “He’s murdered, your honour.”
    

      As he said this Nikolashka bDlinked and began to cry.
    

      “We know that he is murdered. But where is he now? Where is his
      body?”
    

      “They say it was dragged out of window and buried in the garden.”
    

      “H’m . . . the results of the investigation are already known
      in the kitchen then. . . . That’s bad. My good fellow, where were
      you on the night when your master was killed? On Saturday, that is?”
    

      Nikolashka raised his head, craned his neck, and pondered.
    

      “I can’t say, your honour,” he said. “I was drunk
      and I don’t remember.”
    

      “An alibi!” whispered Dyukovsky, grinning and rubbing his
      hands.
    

      “Ah! And why is it there’s blood under your master’s
      window!”
    

      Nikolashka flung up his head and pondered.
    

      “Think a little quicker,” said the police captain.
    

      “In a minute. That blood’s from a trifling matter, your
      honour. I killed a hen; I cut her throat very simply in the usual way, and
      she fluttered out of my hands and took and ran off. . . .That’s what
      the blood’s from.”
    

      Yefrem testified that Nikolashka really did kill a hen every evening and
      killed it in all sorts of places, and no one had seen the half-killed hen
      running about the garden, though of course it could not be positively
      denied that it had done so.
    

      “An alibi,” laughed Dyukovsky, “and what an idiotic
      alibi.”
    

      “Have you had relations with Akulka?”
    

      “Yes, I have sinned.”
    

      “And your master carried her off from you?”
    

      “No, not at all. It was this gentleman here, Mr. Psyekov, Ivan
      Mihalitch, who enticed her from me, and the master took her from Ivan
      Mihalitch. That’s how it was.”
    

      Psyekov looked confused and began rubbing his left eye. Dyukovsky fastened
      his eyes upon him, detected his confusion, and started. He saw on the
      steward’s legs dark blue trousers which he had not previously
      noticed. The trousers reminded him of the blue threads found on the
      burdock. Tchubikov in his turn glanced suspiciously at Psyekov.
    

      “You can go!” he said to Nikolashka. “And now allow me
      to put one question to you, Mr. Psyekov. You were here, of course, on the
      Saturday of last week?
    

      “Yes, at ten o’clock I had supper with Mark Ivanitch.”
    

      “And afterwards?”
    

      Psyekov was confused, and got up from the table.
    

      “Afterwards . . . afterwards . . . I really don’t remember,”
      he muttered. “I had drunk a good deal on that occasion. . . . I can’t
      remember where and when I went to bed. . . . Why do you all look at me
      like that? As though I had murdered him!”
    

      “Where did you wake up?”
    

      “I woke up in the servants’ kitchen on the stove . . . . They
      can all confirm that. How I got on to the stove I can’t say. . . .”
    

      “Don’t disturb yourself . . . Do you know Akulina?”
    

      “Oh well, not particularly.”
    

      “Did she leave you for Klyauzov?”
    

      “Yes. . . . Yefrem, bring some more mushrooms! Will you have some
      tea, Yevgraf Kuzmitch?”
    

      There followed an oppressive, painful silence that lasted for some five
      minutes. Dyukovsky held his tongue, and kept his piercing eyes on Psyekov’s
      face, which gradually turned pale. The silence was broken by Tchubikov.
    

      “We must go to the big house,” he said, “and speak to
      the deceased’s sister, Marya Ivanovna. She may give us some
      evidence.”
    

      Tchubikov and his assistant thanked Psyekov for the lunch, then went off
      to the big house. They found Klyauzov’s sister, a maiden lady of
      five and forty, on her knees before a high family shrine of ikons. When
      she saw portfolios and caps adorned with cockades in her visitors’
      hands, she turned pale.
    

      “First of all, I must offer an apology for disturbing your
      devotions, so to say,” the gallant Tchubikov began with a scrape.
      “We have come to you with a request. You have heard, of course,
      already. . . . There is a suspicion that your brother has somehow been
      murdered. God’s will, you know. . . . Death no one can escape,
      neither Tsar nor ploughman. Can you not assist us with some fact,
      something that will throw light?”
    

      “Oh, do not ask me!” said Marya Ivanovna, turning whiter
      still, and hiding her face in her hands. “I can tell you nothing!
      Nothing! I implore you! I can say nothing . . . What can I do? Oh, no, no
      . . . not a word . . . of my brother! I would rather die than speak!”
    

      Marya Ivanovna burst into tears and went away into another room. The
      officials looked at each other, shrugged their shoulders, and beat a
      retreat.
    

      “A devil of a woman!” said Dyukovsky, swearing as they went
      out of the big house. “Apparently she knows something and is
      concealing it. And there is something peculiar in the maid-servant’s
      expression too. . . . You wait a bit, you devils! We will get to the
      bottom of it all!”
    

      In the evening, Tchubikov and his assistant were driving home by the light
      of a pale-faced moon; they sat in their waggonette, summing up in their
      minds the incidents of the day. Both were exhausted and sat silent.
      Tchubikov never liked talking on the road. In spite of his talkativeness,
      Dyukovsky held his tongue in deference to the old man. Towards the end of
      the journey, however, the young man could endure the silence no longer,
      and began:
    

      “That Nikolashka has had a hand in the business,” he said,
      “non dubitandum est. One can see from his mug too what sort
      of a chap he is. . . . His alibi gives him away hand and foot. There is no
      doubt either that he was not the instigator of the crime. He was only the
      stupid hired tool. Do you agree? The discreet Psyekov plays a not
      unimportant part in the affair too. His blue trousers, his embarrassment,
      his lying on the stove from fright after the murder, his alibi, and
      Akulka.”
    

      “Keep it up, you’re in your glory! According to you, if a man
      knows Akulka he is the murderer. Ah, you hot-head! You ought to be sucking
      your bottle instead of investigating cases! You used to be running after
      Akulka too, does that mean that you had a hand in this business?”
    

      “Akulka was a cook in your house for a month, too, but . . . I don’t
      say anything. On that Saturday night I was playing cards with you, I saw
      you, or I should be after you too. The woman is not the point, my good
      sir. The point is the nasty, disgusting, mean feeling. . . . The discreet
      young man did not like to be cut out, do you see. Vanity, do you see. . .
      . He longed to be revenged. Then . . . His thick lips are a strong
      indication of sensuality. Do you remember how he smacked his lips when he
      compared Akulka to Nana? That he is burning with passion, the scoundrel,
      is beyond doubt! And so you have wounded vanity and unsatisfied passion.
      That’s enough to lead to murder. Two of them are in our hands, but
      who is the third? Nikolashka and Psyekov held him. Who was it smothered
      him? Psyekov is timid, easily embarrassed, altogether a coward. People
      like Nikolashka are not equal to smothering with a pillow, they set to
      work with an axe or a mallet. . . . Some third person must have smothered
      him, but who?”
    

      Dyukovsky pulled his cap over his eyes, and pondered. He was silent till
      the waggonette had driven up to the examining magistrate’s house.
    

      “Eureka!” he said, as he went into the house, and took off his
      overcoat. “Eureka, Nikolay Yermolaitch! I can’t understand how
      it is it didn’t occur to me before. Do you know who the third is?”
    

      “Do leave off, please! There’s supper ready. Sit down to
      supper!”
    

      Tchubikov and Dyukovsky sat down to supper. Dyukovsky poured himself out a
      wine-glassful of vodka, got up, stretched, and with sparkling eyes, said:
    

      “Let me tell you then that the third person who collaborated with
      the scoundrel Psyekov and smothered him was a woman! Yes! I am speaking of
      the murdered man’s sister, Marya Ivanovna!”
    

      Tchubikov coughed over his vodka and fastened his eyes on Dyukovsky.
    

      “Are you . . . not quite right? Is your head . . . not quite right?
      Does it ache?”
    

      “I am quite well. Very good, suppose I have gone out of my mind, but
      how do you explain her confusion on our arrival? How do you explain her
      refusal to give information? Admitting that that is trivial—very
      good! All right!—but think of the terms they were on! She detested
      her brother! She is an Old Believer, he was a profligate, a godless fellow
      . . . that is what has bred hatred between them! They say he succeeded in
      persuading her that he was an angel of Satan! He used to practise
      spiritualism in her presence!”
    

      “Well, what then?”
    

      “Don’t you understand? She’s an Old Believer, she
      murdered him through fanaticism! She has not merely slain a wicked man, a
      profligate, she has freed the world from Antichrist—and that she
      fancies is her merit, her religious achievement! Ah, you don’t know
      these old maids, these Old Believers! You should read Dostoevsky! And what
      does Lyeskov say . . . and Petchersky! It’s she, it’s she, I’ll
      stake my life on it. She smothered him! Oh, the fiendish woman! Wasn’t
      she, perhaps, standing before the ikons when we went in to put us off the
      scent? ‘I’ll stand up and say my prayers,’ she said to
      herself, ‘they will think I am calm and don’t expect them.’
      That’s the method of all novices in crime. Dear Nikolay Yermolaitch!
      My dear man! Do hand this case over to me! Let me go through with it to
      the end! My dear fellow! I have begun it, and I will carry it through to
      the end.”
    

      Tchubikov shook his head and frowned.
    

      “I am equal to sifting difficult cases myself,” he said.
      “And it’s your place not to put yourself forward. Write what
      is dictated to you, that is your business!”
    

      Dyukovsky flushed crimson, walked out, and slammed the door.
    

      “A clever fellow, the rogue,” Tchubikov muttered, looking
      after him. “Ve-ery clever! Only inappropriately hasty. I shall have
      to buy him a cigar-case at the fair for a present.”
    

      Next morning a lad with a big head and a hare lip came from Klyauzovka. He
      gave his name as the shepherd Danilko, and furnished a very interesting
      piece of information.
    

      “I had had a drop,” said he. “I stayed on till midnight
      at my crony’s. As I was going home, being drunk, I got into the
      river for a bathe. I was bathing and what do I see! Two men coming along
      the dam carrying something black. ‘Tyoo!’ I shouted at them.
      They were scared, and cut along as fast as they could go into the Makarev
      kitchen-gardens. Strike me dead, if it wasn’t the master they were
      carrying!”
    

      Towards evening of the same day Psyekov and Nikolashka were arrested and
      taken under guard to the district town. In the town they were put in the
      prison tower.
    

      II
    

Twelve days passed.
    

      It was morning. The examining magistrate, Nikolay Yermolaitch, was sitting
      at a green table at home, looking through the papers, relating to the
      “Klyauzov case”; Dyukovsky was pacing up and down the room
      restlessly, like a wolf in a cage.
    

      “You are convinced of the guilt of Nikolashka and Psyekov,” he
      said, nervously pulling at his youthful beard. “Why is it you refuse
      to be convinced of the guilt of Marya Ivanovna? Haven’t you evidence
      enough?”
    

      “I don’t say that I don’t believe in it. I am convinced
      of it, but somehow I can’t believe it. . . . There is no real
      evidence. It’s all theoretical, as it were. . . . Fanaticism and one
      thing and another. . . .”
    

      “And you must have an axe and bloodstained sheets! . . . You
      lawyers! Well, I will prove it to you then! Do give up your slip-shod
      attitude to the psychological aspect of the case. Your Marya Ivanovna
      ought to be in Siberia! I’ll prove it. If theoretical proof is not
      enough for you, I have something material. . . . It will show you how
      right my theory is! Only let me go about a little!”
    

      “What are you talking about?”
    

      “The Swedish match! Have you forgotten? I haven’t forgotten
      it! I’ll find out who struck it in the murdered man’s room! It
      was not struck by Nikolashka, nor by Psyekov, neither of whom turned out
      to have matches when searched, but a third person, that is Marya Ivanovna.
      And I will prove it! . . . Only let me drive about the district, make some
      inquiries. . . .”
    

      “Oh, very well, sit down. . . . Let us proceed to the examination.”
    

      Dyukovsky sat down to the table, and thrust his long nose into the papers.
    

      “Bring in Nikolay Tetchov!” cried the examining magistrate.
    

      Nikolashka was brought in. He was pale and thin as a chip. He was
      trembling.
    

      “Tetchov!” began Tchubikov. “In 1879 you were convicted
      of theft and condemned to a term of imprisonment. In 1882 you were
      condemned for theft a second time, and a second time sent to prison . . .
      We know all about it. . . .”
    

      A look of surprise came up into Nikolashka’s face. The examining
      magistrate’s omniscience amazed him, but soon wonder was replaced by
      an expression of extreme distress. He broke into sobs, and asked leave to
      go to wash, and calm himself. He was led out.
    

      “Bring in Psyekov!” said the examining magistrate.
    

      Psyekov was led in. The young man’s face had greatly changed during
      those twelve days. He was thin, pale, and wasted. There was a look of
      apathy in his eyes.
    

      “Sit down, Psyekov,” said Tchubikov. “I hope that to-day
      you will be sensible and not persist in lying as on other occasions. All
      this time you have denied your participation in the murder of Klyauzov, in
      spite of the mass of evidence against you. It is senseless. Confession is
      some mitigation of guilt. To-day I am talking to you for the last time. If
      you don’t confess to-day, to-morrow it will be too late. Come, tell
      us. . . .”
    

      “I know nothing, and I don’t know your evidence,”
      whispered Psyekov.
    

      “That’s useless! Well then, allow me to tell you how it
      happened. On Saturday evening, you were sitting in Klyauzov’s
      bedroom drinking vodka and beer with him.” (Dyukovsky riveted his
      eyes on Psyekov’s face, and did not remove them during the whole
      monologue.) “Nikolay was waiting upon you. Between twelve and one
      Mark Ivanitch told you he wanted to go to bed. He always did go to bed at
      that time. While he was taking off his boots and giving you some
      instructions regarding the estate, Nikolay and you at a given signal
      seized your intoxicated master and flung him back upon the bed. One of you
      sat on his feet, the other on his head. At that moment the lady, you know
      who, in a black dress, who had arranged with you beforehand the part she
      would take in the crime, came in from the passage. She picked up the
      pillow, and proceeded to smother him with it. During the struggle, the
      light went out. The woman took a box of Swedish matches out of her pocket
      and lighted the candle. Isn’t that right? I see from your face that
      what I say is true. Well, to proceed. . . . Having smothered him, and
      being convinced that he had ceased to breathe, Nikolay and you dragged him
      out of window and put him down near the burdocks. Afraid that he might
      regain consciousness, you struck him with something sharp. Then you
      carried him, and laid him for some time under a lilac bush. After resting
      and considering a little, you carried him . . . lifted him over the
      hurdle. . . . Then went along the road. . . Then comes the dam; near the
      dam you were frightened by a peasant. But what is the matter with you?”
    

      Psyekov, white as a sheet, got up, staggering.
    

      “I am suffocating!” he said. “Very well. . . . So be it.
      . . . Only I must go. . . . Please.”
    

      Psyekov was led out.
    

      “At last he has admitted it!” said Tchubikov, stretching at
      his ease. “He has given himself away! How neatly I caught him there.”
    

      “And he didn’t deny the woman in black!” said Dyukovsky,
      laughing. “I am awfully worried over that Swedish match, though! I
      can’t endure it any longer. Good-bye! I am going!”
    

      Dyukovsky put on his cap and went off. Tchubikov began interrogating
      Akulka.
    

      Akulka declared that she knew nothing about it. . . .
    

      “I have lived with you and with nobody else!” she said.
    

      At six o’clock in the evening Dyukovsky returned. He was more
      excited than ever. His hands trembled so much that he could not unbutton
      his overcoat. His cheeks were burning. It was evident that he had not come
      back without news.
    

      “Veni, vidi, vici!” he cried, dashing into Tchubikov’s
      room and sinking into an arm-chair. “I vow on my honour, I begin to
      believe in my own genius. Listen, damnation take us! Listen and wonder,
      old friend! It’s comic and it’s sad. You have three in your
      grasp already . . . haven’t you? I have found a fourth murderer, or
      rather murderess, for it is a woman! And what a woman! I would have given
      ten years of my life merely to touch her shoulders. But . . . listen. I
      drove to Klyauzovka and proceeded to describe a spiral round it. On the
      way I visited all the shopkeepers and innkeepers, asking for Swedish
      matches. Everywhere I was told ‘No.’ I have been on my round
      up to now. Twenty times I lost hope, and as many times regained it. I have
      been on the go all day long, and only an hour ago came upon what I was
      looking for. A couple of miles from here they gave me a packet of a dozen
      boxes of matches. One box was missing . . . I asked at once: ‘Who
      bought that box?’ ‘So-and-so. She took a fancy to them. . .
      They crackle.’ My dear fellow! Nikolay Yermolaitch! What can
      sometimes be done by a man who has been expelled from a seminary and
      studied Gaboriau is beyond all conception! From to-day I shall began to
      respect myself! . . . Ough. . . . Well, let us go!”
    

      “Go where?”
    

      “To her, to the fourth. . . . We must make haste, or . . . I shall
      explode with impatience! Do you know who she is? You will never guess. The
      young wife of our old police superintendent, Yevgraf Kuzmitch, Olga
      Petrovna; that’s who it is! She bought that box of matches!”
    

      “You . . . you. . . . Are you out of your mind?”
    

      “It’s very natural! In the first place she smokes, and in the
      second she was head over ears in love with Klyauzov. He rejected her love
      for the sake of an Akulka. Revenge. I remember now, I once came upon them
      behind the screen in the kitchen. She was cursing him, while he was
      smoking her cigarette and puffing the smoke into her face. But do come
      along; make haste, for it is getting dark already . . . . Let us go!”
    

      “I have not gone so completely crazy yet as to disturb a
      respectable, honourable woman at night for the sake of a wretched boy!”
    

      “Honourable, respectable. . . . You are a rag then, not an examining
      magistrate! I have never ventured to abuse you, but now you force me to
      it! You rag! you old fogey! Come, dear Nikolay Yermolaitch, I entreat you!”
    

      The examining magistrate waved his hand in refusal and spat in disgust.
    

      “I beg you! I beg you, not for my own sake, but in the interests of
      justice! I beseech you, indeed! Do me a favour, if only for once in your
      life!”
    

      Dyukovsky fell on his knees.
    

      “Nikolay Yermolaitch, do be so good! Call me a scoundrel, a
      worthless wretch if I am in error about that woman! It is such a case, you
      know! It is a case! More like a novel than a case. The fame of it will be
      all over Russia. They will make you examining magistrate for particularly
      important cases! Do understand, you unreasonable old man!”
    

      The examining magistrate frowned and irresolutely put out his hand towards
      his hat.
    

      “Well, the devil take you!” he said, “let us go.”
    

      It was already dark when the examining magistrate’s waggonette
      rolled up to the police superintendent’s door.
    

      “What brutes we are!” said Tchubikov, as he reached for the
      bell. “We are disturbing people.”
    

      “Never mind, never mind, don’t be frightened. We will say that
      one of the springs has broken.”
    

      Tchubikov and Dyukovsky were met in the doorway by a tall, plump woman of
      three and twenty, with eyebrows as black as pitch and full red lips. It
      was Olga Petrovna herself.
    

      “Ah, how very nice,” she said, smiling all over her face.
      “You are just in time for supper. My Yevgraf Kuzmitch is not at
      home. . . . He is staying at the priest’s. But we can get on without
      him. Sit down. Have you come from an inquiry?”
    

      “Yes. . . . We have broken one of our springs, you know,”
      began Tchubikov, going into the drawing-room and sitting down in an
      easy-chair.
    

      “Take her by surprise at once and overwhelm her,” Dyukovsky
      whispered to him.
    

      “A spring .. . er . . . yes. . . . We just drove up. . . .”
    

      “Overwhelm her, I tell you! She will guess if you go drawing it out.”
    

      “Oh, do as you like, but spare me,” muttered Tchubikov,
      getting up and walking to the window. “I can’t! You cooked the
      mess, you eat it!”
    

      “Yes, the spring,” Dyukovsky began, going up to the
      superintendent’s wife and wrinkling his long nose. “We have
      not come in to . . . er-er-er . . . supper, nor to see Yevgraf Kuzmitch.
      We have come to ask you, madam, where is Mark Ivanovitch whom you have
      murdered?”
    

      “What? What Mark Ivanovitch?” faltered the superintendent’s
      wife, and her full face was suddenly in one instant suffused with crimson.
      “I . . . don’t understand.”
    

      “I ask you in the name of the law! Where is Klyauzov? We know all
      about it!”
    

      “Through whom?” the superintendent’s wife asked slowly,
      unable to face Dyukovsky’s eyes.
    

      “Kindly inform us where he is!”
    

      “But how did you find out? Who told you?”
    

      “We know all about it. I insist in the name of the law.”
    

      The examining magistrate, encouraged by the lady’s confusion, went
      up to her.
    

      “Tell us and we will go away. Otherwise we . . .”
    

      “What do you want with him?”
    

      “What is the object of such questions, madam? We ask you for
      information. You are trembling, confused. . . . Yes, he has been murdered,
      and if you will have it, murdered by you! Your accomplices have betrayed
      you!”
    

      The police superintendent’s wife turned pale.
    

      “Come along,” she said quietly, wringing her hands. “He
      is hidden in the bath-house. Only for God’s sake, don’t tell
      my husband! I implore you! It would be too much for him.”
    

      The superintendent’s wife took a big key from the wall, and led her
      visitors through the kitchen and the passage into the yard. It was dark in
      the yard. There was a drizzle of fine rain. The superintendent’s
      wife went on ahead. Tchubikov and Dyukovsky strode after her through the
      long grass, breathing in the smell of wild hemp and slops, which made a
      squelching sound under their feet. It was a big yard. Soon there were no
      more pools of slops, and their feet felt ploughed land. In the darkness
      they saw the silhouette of trees, and among the trees a little house with
      a crooked chimney.
    

      “This is the bath-house,” said the superintendent’s
      wife, “but, I implore you, do not tell anyone.”
    

      Going up to the bath-house, Tchubikov and Dyukovsky saw a large padlock on
      the door.
    

      “Get ready your candle-end and matches,” Tchubikov whispered
      to his assistant.
    

      The superintendent’s wife unlocked the padlock and let the visitors
      into the bath-house. Dyukovsky struck a match and lighted up the entry. In
      the middle of it stood a table. On the table, beside a podgy little
      samovar, was a soup tureen with some cold cabbage-soup in it, and a dish
      with traces of some sauce on it.
    

      “Go on!”
    

      They went into the next room, the bath-room. There, too, was a table. On
      the table there stood a big dish of ham, a bottle of vodka, plates, knives
      and forks.
    

      “But where is he . . . where’s the murdered man?”
    

      “He is on the top shelf,” whispered the superintendent’s
      wife, turning paler than ever and trembling.
    

      Dyukovsky took the candle-end in his hand and climbed up to the upper
      shelf. There he saw a long, human body, lying motionless on a big feather
      bed. The body emitted a faint snore. . . .
    

      “They have made fools of us, damn it all!” Dyukovsky cried.
      “This is not he! It is some living blockhead lying here. Hi! who are
      you, damnation take you!”
    

      The body drew in its breath with a whistling sound and moved. Dyukovsky
      prodded it with his elbow. It lifted up its arms, stretched, and raised
      its head.
    

      “Who is that poking?” a hoarse, ponderous bass voice inquired.
      “What do you want?”
    

      Dyukovsky held the candle-end to the face of the unknown and uttered a
      shriek. In the crimson nose, in the ruffled, uncombed hair, in the
      pitch-black moustaches of which one was jauntily twisted and pointed
      insolently towards the ceiling, he recognised Cornet Klyauzov.
    

      “You. . . . Mark . . . Ivanitch! Impossible!”
    

      The examining magistrate looked up and was dumbfoundered.
    

      “It is I, yes. . . . And it’s you, Dyukovsky! What the devil
      do you want here? And whose ugly mug is that down there? Holy Saints, it’s
      the examining magistrate! How in the world did you come here?”
    

      Klyauzov hurriedly got down and embraced Tchubikov. Olga Petrovna whisked
      out of the door.
    

      “However did you come? Let’s have a drink!—dash it all!
      Tra-ta-ti-to-tom . . . . Let’s have a drink! Who brought you here,
      though? How did you get to know I was here? It doesn’t matter,
      though! Have a drink!”
    

      Klyauzov lighted the lamp and poured out three glasses of vodka.
    

      “The fact is, I don’t understand you,” said the
      examining magistrate, throwing out his hands. “Is it you, or not
      you?”
    

      “Stop that. . . . Do you want to give me a sermon? Don’t
      trouble yourself! Dyukovsky boy, drink up your vodka! Friends, let us pass
      the . . . What are you staring at . . . ? Drink!”
    

      “All the same, I can’t understand,” said the examining
      magistrate, mechanically drinking his vodka. “Why are you here?”
    

      “Why shouldn’t I be here, if I am comfortable here?”
    

      Klyauzov sipped his vodka and ate some ham.
    

      “I am staying with the superintendent’s wife, as you see. In
      the wilds among the ruins, like some house goblin. Drink! I felt sorry for
      her, you know, old man! I took pity on her, and, well, I am living here in
      the deserted bath-house, like a hermit. . . . I am well fed. Next week I
      am thinking of moving on. . . . I’ve had enough of it. . . .”
    

      “Inconceivable!” said Dyukovsky.
    

      “What is there inconceivable in it?”
    

      “Inconceivable! For God’s sake, how did your boot get into the
      garden?”
    

      “What boot?”
    

      “We found one of your boots in the bedroom and the other in the
      garden.”
    

      “And what do you want to know that for? It is not your business. But
      do drink, dash it all. Since you have waked me up, you may as well drink!
      There’s an interesting tale about that boot, my boy. I didn’t
      want to come to Olga’s. I didn’t feel inclined, you know, I’d
      had a drop too much. . . . She came under the window and began scolding
      me. . . . You know how women . . . as a rule. Being drunk, I up and flung
      my boot at her. Ha-ha! . . . ‘Don’t scold,’ I said. She
      clambered in at the window, lighted the lamp, and gave me a good drubbing,
      as I was drunk. I have plenty to eat here. . . . Love, vodka, and good
      things! But where are you off to? Tchubikov, where are you off to?”
    

      The examining magistrate spat on the floor and walked out of the
      bath-house. Dyukovsky followed him with his head hanging. Both got into
      the waggonette in silence and drove off. Never had the road seemed so long
      and dreary. Both were silent. Tchubikov was shaking with anger all the
      way. Dyukovsky hid his face in his collar as though he were afraid the
      darkness and the drizzling rain might read his shame on his face.
    

      On getting home the examining magistrate found the doctor, Tyutyuev,
      there. The doctor was sitting at the table and heaving deep sighs as he
      turned over the pages of the Neva.
    

      “The things that are going on in the world,” he said, greeting
      the examining magistrate with a melancholy smile. “Austria is at it
      again . . . and Gladstone, too, in a way. . . .”
    

      Tchubikov flung his hat under the table and began to tremble.
    

      “You devil of a skeleton! Don’t bother me! I’ve told you
      a thousand times over, don’t bother me with your politics! It’s
      not the time for politics! And as for you,” he turned upon Dyukovsky
      and shook his fist at him, “as for you. . . . I’ll never
      forget it, as long as I live!”
    

      “But the Swedish match, you know! How could I tell. . . .”
    

      “Choke yourself with your match! Go away and don’t irritate
      me, or goodness knows what I shall do to you. Don’t let me set eyes
      on you.”
    

      Dyukovsky heaved a sigh, took his hat, and went out.
    

      “I’ll go and get drunk!” he decided, as he went out of
      the gate, and he sauntered dejectedly towards the tavern.
    

      When the superintendent’s wife got home from the bath-house she
      found her husband in the drawing-room.
    

      “What did the examining magistrate come about?” asked her
      husband.
    

      “He came to say that they had found Klyauzov. Only fancy, they found
      him staying with another man’s wife.”
    

      “Ah, Mark Ivanitch, Mark Ivanitch!” sighed the police
      superintendent, turning up his eyes. “I told you that dissipation
      would lead to no good! I told you so—you wouldn’t heed me!”
    








      The Bishop and Other Stories, Translated by Constance Garnett
    








      THE BISHOP
    

      I
    

THE evening service
      was being celebrated on the eve of Palm Sunday in the Old Petrovsky
      Convent. When they began distributing the palm it was close upon ten o’clock,
      the candles were burning dimly, the wicks wanted snuffing; it was all in a
      sort of mist. In the twilight of the church the crowd seemed heaving like
      the sea, and to Bishop Pyotr, who had been unwell for the last three days,
      it seemed that all the faces—old and young, men’s and women’s—were
      alike, that everyone who came up for the palm had the same expression in
      his eyes. In the mist he could not see the doors; the crowd kept moving
      and looked as though there were no end to it. The female choir was
      singing, a nun was reading the prayers for the day.
    

      How stifling, how hot it was! How long the service went on! Bishop Pyotr
      was tired. His breathing was laboured and rapid, his throat was parched,
      his shoulders ached with weariness, his legs were trembling. And it
      disturbed him unpleasantly when a religious maniac uttered occasional
      shrieks in the gallery. And then all of a sudden, as though in a dream or
      delirium, it seemed to the bishop as though his own mother Marya
      Timofyevna, whom he had not seen for nine years, or some old woman just
      like his mother, came up to him out of the crowd, and, after taking a palm
      branch from him, walked away looking at him all the while good-humouredly
      with a kind, joyful smile until she was lost in the crowd. And for some
      reason tears flowed down his face. There was peace in his heart,
      everything was well, yet he kept gazing fixedly towards the left choir,
      where the prayers were being read, where in the dusk of evening you could
      not recognize anyone, and—wept. Tears glistened on his face and on
      his beard. Here someone close at hand was weeping, then someone else
      farther away, then others and still others, and little by little the
      church was filled with soft weeping. And a little later, within five
      minutes, the nuns’ choir was singing; no one was weeping and
      everything was as before.
    

      Soon the service was over. When the bishop got into his carriage to drive
      home, the gay, melodious chime of the heavy, costly bells was filling the
      whole garden in the moonlight. The white walls, the white crosses on the
      tombs, the white birch-trees and black shadows, and the far-away moon in
      the sky exactly over the convent, seemed now living their own life, apart
      and incomprehensible, yet very near to man. It was the beginning of April,
      and after the warm spring day it turned cool; there was a faint touch of
      frost, and the breath of spring could be felt in the soft, chilly air. The
      road from the convent to the town was sandy, the horses had to go at a
      walking pace, and on both sides of the carriage in the brilliant, peaceful
      moonlight there were people trudging along home from church through the
      sand. And all was silent, sunk in thought; everything around seemed
      kindly, youthful, akin, everything—trees and sky and even the moon,
      and one longed to think that so it would be always.
    

      At last the carriage drove into the town and rumbled along the principal
      street. The shops were already shut, but at Erakin’s, the
      millionaire shopkeeper’s, they were trying the new electric lights,
      which flickered brightly, and a crowd of people were gathered round. Then
      came wide, dark, deserted streets, one after another; then the highroad,
      the open country, the fragrance of pines. And suddenly there rose up
      before the bishop’s eyes a white turreted wall, and behind it a tall
      belfry in the full moonlight, and beside it five shining, golden cupolas:
      this was the Pankratievsky Monastery, in which Bishop Pyotr lived. And
      here, too, high above the monastery, was the silent, dreamy moon. The
      carriage drove in at the gate, crunching over the sand; here and there in
      the moonlight there were glimpses of dark monastic figures, and there was
      the sound of footsteps on the flag-stones. . . .
    

      “You know, your holiness, your mamma arrived while you were away,”
      the lay brother informed the bishop as he went into his cell.
    

      “My mother? When did she come?”
    

      “Before the evening service. She asked first where you were and then
      she went to the convent.”
    

      “Then it was her I saw in the church, just now! Oh, Lord!”
    

      And the bishop laughed with joy.
    

      “She bade me tell your holiness,” the lay brother went on,
      “that she would come to-morrow. She had a little girl with her—her
      grandchild, I suppose. They are staying at Ovsyannikov’s inn.”
    

      “What time is it now?”
    

      “A little after eleven.”
    

      “Oh, how vexing!”
    

      The bishop sat for a little while in the parlour, hesitating, and as it
      were refusing to believe it was so late. His arms and legs were stiff, his
      head ached. He was hot and uncomfortable. After resting a little he went
      into his bedroom, and there, too, he sat a little, still thinking of his
      mother; he could hear the lay brother going away, and Father Sisoy
      coughing the other side of the wall. The monastery clock struck a quarter.
    

      The bishop changed his clothes and began reading the prayers before sleep.
      He read attentively those old, long familiar prayers, and at the same time
      thought about his mother. She had nine children and about forty
      grandchildren. At one time, she had lived with her husband, the deacon, in
      a poor village; she had lived there a very long time from the age of
      seventeen to sixty. The bishop remembered her from early childhood, almost
      from the age of three, and—how he had loved her! Sweet, precious
      childhood, always fondly remembered! Why did it, that long-past time that
      could never return, why did it seem brighter, fuller, and more festive
      than it had really been? When in his childhood or youth he had been ill,
      how tender and sympathetic his mother had been! And now his prayers
      mingled with the memories, which gleamed more and more brightly like a
      flame, and the prayers did not hinder his thinking of his mother.
    

      When he had finished his prayers he undressed and lay down, and at once,
      as soon as it was dark, there rose before his mind his dead father, his
      mother, his native village Lesopolye . . . the creak of wheels, the bleat
      of sheep, the church bells on bright summer mornings, the gypsies under
      the window—oh, how sweet to think of it! He remembered the priest of
      Lesopolye, Father Simeon—mild, gentle, kindly; he was a lean little
      man, while his son, a divinity student, was a huge fellow and talked in a
      roaring bass voice. The priest’s son had flown into a rage with the
      cook and abused her: “Ah, you Jehud’s ass!” and Father
      Simeon overhearing it, said not a word, and was only ashamed because he
      could not remember where such an ass was mentioned in the Bible. After him
      the priest at Lesopolye had been Father Demyan, who used to drink heavily,
      and at times drank till he saw green snakes, and was even nicknamed Demyan
      Snakeseer. The schoolmaster at Lesopolye was Matvey Nikolaitch, who had
      been a divinity student, a kind and intelligent man, but he, too, was a
      drunkard; he never beat the schoolchildren, but for some reason he always
      had hanging on his wall a bunch of birch-twigs, and below it an utterly
      meaningless inscription in Latin: “Betula kinderbalsamica secuta.”
      He had a shaggy black dog whom he called Syntax.
    

      And his holiness laughed. Six miles from Lesopolye was the village Obnino
      with a wonder-working ikon. In the summer they used to carry the ikon in
      procession about the neighbouring villages and ring the bells the whole
      day long; first in one village and then in another, and it used to seem to
      the bishop then that joy was quivering in the air, and he (in those days
      his name was Pavlusha) used to follow the ikon, bareheaded and barefoot,
      with naÃ¯ve faith, with a naÃ¯ve smile, infinitely happy. In Obnino, he
      remembered now, there were always a lot of people, and the priest there,
      Father Alexey, to save time during mass, used to make his deaf nephew
      Ilarion read the names of those for whose health or whose souls’
      peace prayers were asked. Ilarion used to read them, now and then getting
      a five or ten kopeck piece for the service, and only when he was grey and
      bald, when life was nearly over, he suddenly saw written on one of the
      pieces of paper: “What a fool you are, Ilarion.” Up to fifteen
      at least Pavlusha was undeveloped and idle at his lessons, so much so that
      they thought of taking him away from the clerical school and putting him
      into a shop; one day, going to the post at Obnino for letters, he had
      stared a long time at the post-office clerks and asked: “Allow me to
      ask, how do you get your salary, every month or every day?”
    

      His holiness crossed himself and turned over on the other side, trying to
      stop thinking and go to sleep.
    

      “My mother has come,” he remembered and laughed.
    

      The moon peeped in at the window, the floor was lighted up, and there were
      shadows on it. A cricket was chirping. Through the wall Father Sisoy was
      snoring in the next room, and his aged snore had a sound that suggested
      loneliness, forlornness, even vagrancy. Sisoy had once been housekeeper to
      the bishop of the diocese, and was called now “the former Father
      Housekeeper”; he was seventy years old, he lived in a monastery
      twelve miles from the town and stayed sometimes in the town, too. He had
      come to the Pankratievsky Monastery three days before, and the bishop had
      kept him that he might talk to him at his leisure about matters of
      business, about the arrangements here. . . .
    

      At half-past one they began ringing for matins. Father Sisoy could be
      heard coughing, muttering something in a discontented voice, then he got
      up and walked barefoot about the rooms.
    

      “Father Sisoy,” the bishop called.
    

      Sisoy went back to his room and a little later made his appearance in his
      boots, with a candle; he had on his cassock over his underclothes and on
      his head was an old faded skull-cap.
    

      “I can’t sleep,” said the bishop, sitting up. “I
      must be unwell. And what it is I don’t know. Fever!”
    

      “You must have caught cold, your holiness. You must be rubbed with
      tallow.” Sisoy stood a little and yawned. “O Lord, forgive me,
      a sinner.”
    

      “They had the electric lights on at Erakin’s today,” he
      said; “I don’t like it!”
    

      Father Sisoy was old, lean, bent, always dissatisfied with something, and
      his eyes were angry-looking and prominent as a crab’s.
    

      “I don’t like it,” he said, going away. “I don’t
      like it. Bother it!”
    

      II
    

      Next day, Palm Sunday, the bishop took the service in the cathedral in the
      town, then he visited the bishop of the diocese, then visited a very sick
      old lady, the widow of a general, and at last drove home. Between one and
      two o’clock he had welcome visitors dining with him—his mother
      and his niece Katya, a child of eight years old. All dinner-time the
      spring sunshine was streaming in at the windows, throwing bright light on
      the white tablecloth and on Katya’s red hair. Through the double
      windows they could hear the noise of the rooks and the notes of the
      starlings in the garden.
    

      “It is nine years since we have met,” said the old lady.
      “And when I looked at you in the monastery yesterday, good Lord! you’ve
      not changed a bit, except maybe you are thinner and your beard is a little
      longer. Holy Mother, Queen of Heaven! Yesterday at the evening service no
      one could help crying. I, too, as I looked at you, suddenly began crying,
      though I couldn’t say why. His Holy Will!”
    

      And in spite of the affectionate tone in which she said this, he could see
      she was constrained as though she were uncertain whether to address him
      formally or familiarly, to laugh or not, and that she felt herself more a
      deacon’s widow than his mother. And Katya gazed without bElinking at
      her uncle, his holiness, as though trying to discover what sort of a
      person he was. Her hair sprang up from under the comb and the velvet
      ribbon and stood out like a halo; she had a turned-up nose and sly eyes.
      The child had broken a glass before sitting down to dinner, and now her
      grandmother, as she talked, moved away from Katya first a wineglass and
      then a tumbler. The bishop listened to his mother and remembered how many,
      many years ago she used to take him and his brothers and sisters to
      relations whom she considered rich; in those days she was taken up with
      the care of her children, now with her grandchildren, and she had brought
      Katya. . . .
    

      “Your sister, Varenka, has four children,” she told him;
      “Katya, here, is the eldest. And your brother-in-law Father Ivan
      fell sick, God knows of what, and died three days before the Assumption;
      and my poor Varenka is left a beggar.”
    

      “And how is Nikanor getting on?” the bishop asked about his
      eldest brother.
    

      “He is all right, thank God. Though he has nothing much, yet he can
      live. Only there is one thing: his son, my grandson Nikolasha, did not
      want to go into the Church; he has gone to the university to be a doctor.
      He thinks it is better; but who knows! His Holy Will!”
    

      “Nikolasha cuts up dead people,” said Katya, spilling water
      over her knees.
    

      “Sit still, child,” her grandmother observed calmly, and took
      the glass out of her hand. “Say a prayer, and go on eating.”
    

      “How long it is since we have seen each other!” said the
      bishop, and he tenderly stroked his mother’s hand and shoulder;
      “and I missed you abroad, mother, I missed you dreadfully.”
    

      “Thank you.”
    

      “I used to sit in the evenings at the open window, lonely and alone;
      often there was music playing, and all at once I used to be overcome with
      homesickness and felt as though I would give everything only to be at home
      and see you.”
    

      His mother smiled, beamed, but at once she made a grave face and said:
    

      “Thank you.”
    

      His mood suddenly changed. He looked at his mother and could not
      understand how she had come by that respectfulness, that timid expression
      of face: what was it for? And he did not recognize her. He felt sad and
      vexed. And then his head ached just as it had the day before; his legs
      felt fearfully tired, and the fish seemed to him stale and tasteless; he
      felt thirsty all the time. . . .
    

      After dinner two rich ladies, landowners, arrived and sat for an hour and
      a half in silence with rigid countenances; the archimandrite, a silent,
      rather deaf man, came to see him about business. Then they began ringing
      for vespers; the sun was setting behind the wood and the day was over.
      When he returned from church, he hurriedly said his prayers, got into bed,
      and wrapped himself up as warm as possible.
    

      It was disagreeable to remember the fish he had eaten at dinner. The
      moonlight worried him, and then he heard talking. In an adjoining room,
      probably in the parlour, Father Sisoy was talking politics:
    

      “There’s war among the Japanese now. They are fighting. The
      Japanese, my good soul, are the same as the Montenegrins; they are the
      same race. They were under the Turkish yoke together.”
    

      And then he heard the voice of Marya Timofyevna:
    

      “So, having said our prayers and drunk tea, we went, you know, to
      Father Yegor at Novokatnoye, so. . .”
    

      And she kept on saying, “having had tea” or “having
      drunk tea,” and it seemed as though the only thing she had done in
      her life was to drink tea.
    

      The bishop slowly, languidly, recalled the seminary, the academy. For
      three years he had been Greek teacher in the seminary: by that time he
      could not read without spectacles. Then he had become a monk; he had been
      made a school inspector. Then he had defended his thesis for his degree.
      When he was thirty-two he had been made rector of the seminary, and
      consecrated archimandrite: and then his life had been so easy, so
      pleasant; it seemed so long, so long, no end was in sight. Then he had
      begun to be ill, had grown very thin and almost blind, and by the advice
      of the doctors had to give up everything and go abroad.
    

      “And what then?” asked Sisoy in the next room.
    

      “Then we drank tea . . .” answered Marya Timofyevna.
    

      “Good gracious, you’ve got a green beard,” said Katya
      suddenly in surprise, and she laughed.
    

      The bishop remembered that the grey-headed Father Sisoy’s beard
      really had a shade of green in it, and he laughed.
    

      “God have mercy upon us, what we have to put up with with this girl!”
      said Sisoy, aloud, getting angry. “Spoilt child! Sit quiet!”
    

      The bishop remembered the perfectly new white church in which he had
      conducted the services while living abroad, he remembered the sound of the
      warm sea. In his flat he had five lofty light rooms; in his study he had a
      new writing-table, lots of books. He had read a great deal and often
      written. And he remembered how he had pined for his native land, how a
      blind beggar woman had played the guitar under his window every day and
      sung of love, and how, as he listened, he had always for some reason
      thought of the past. But eight years had passed and he had been called
      back to Russia, and now he was a suffragan bishop, and all the past had
      retreated far away into the mist as though it were a dream. . . .
    

      Father Sisoy came into the bedroom with a candle.
    

      “I say!” he said, wondering, “are you asleep already,
      your holiness?”
    

      “What is it?”
    

      “Why, it’s still early, ten o’clock or less. I bought a
      candle to-day; I wanted to rub you with tallow.”
    

      “I am in a fever . . .” said the bishop, and he sat up.
      “I really ought to have something. My head is bad. . . .”
    

      Sisoy took off the bishop’s shirt and began rubbing his chest and
      back with tallow.
    

      “That’s the way . . . that’s the way . . .” he
      said. “Lord Jesus Christ . . . that’s the way. I walked to the
      town to-day; I was at what’s-his-name’s—the chief priest
      Sidonsky’s. . . . I had tea with him. I don’t like him. Lord
      Jesus Christ. . . . That’s the way. I don’t like him.”
    

      III
    

      The bishop of the diocese, a very fat old man, was ill with rheumatism or
      gout, and had been in bed for over a month. Bishop Pyotr went to see him
      almost every day, and saw all who came to ask his help. And now that he
      was unwell he was struck by the emptiness, the triviality of everything
      which they asked and for which they wept; he was vexed at their ignorance,
      their timidity; and all this useless, petty business oppressed him by the
      mass of it, and it seemed to him that now he understood the diocesan
      bishop, who had once in his young days written on “The Doctrines of
      the Freedom of the Will,” and now seemed to be all lost in
      trivialities, to have forgotten everything, and to have no thoughts of
      religion. The bishop must have lost touch with Russian life while he was
      abroad; he did not find it easy; the peasants seemed to him coarse, the
      women who sought his help dull and stupid, the seminarists and their
      teachers uncultivated and at times savage. And the documents coming in and
      going out were reckoned by tens of thousands; and what documents they
      were! The higher clergy in the whole diocese gave the priests, young and
      old, and even their wives and children, marks for their behaviour—a
      five, a four, and sometimes even a three; and about this he had to talk
      and to read and write serious reports. And there was positively not one
      minute to spare; his soul was troubled all day long, and the bishop was
      only at peace when he was in church.
    

      He could not get used, either, to the awe which, through no wish of his
      own, he inspired in people in spite of his quiet, modest disposition. All
      the people in the province seemed to him little, scared, and guilty when
      he looked at them. Everyone was timid in his presence, even the old chief
      priests; everyone “flopped” at his feet, and not long
      previously an old lady, a village priest’s wife who had come to
      consult him, was so overcome by awe that she could not utter a single
      word, and went empty away. And he, who could never in his sermons bring
      himself to speak ill of people, never reproached anyone because he was so
      sorry for them, was moved to fury with the people who came to consult him,
      lost his temper and flung their petitions on the floor. The whole time he
      had been here, not one person had spoken to him genuinely, simply, as to a
      human being; even his old mother seemed now not the same! And why, he
      wondered, did she chatter away to Sisoy and laugh so much; while with him,
      her son, she was grave and usually silent and constrained, which did not
      suit her at all. The only person who behaved freely with him and said what
      he meant was old Sisoy, who had spent his whole life in the presence of
      bishops and had outlived eleven of them. And so the bishop was at ease
      with him, although, of course, he was a tedious and nonsensical man.
    

      After the service on Tuesday, his holiness Pyotr was in the diocesan
      bishop’s house receiving petitions there; he got excited and angry,
      and then drove home. He was as unwell as before; he longed to be in bed,
      but he had hardly reached home when he was informed that a young merchant
      called Erakin, who subscribed liberally to charities, had come to see him
      about a very important matter. The bishop had to see him. Erakin stayed
      about an hour, talked very loud, almost shouted, and it was difficult to
      understand what he said.
    

      “God grant it may,” he said as he went away. “Most
      essential! According to circumstances, your holiness! I trust it may!”
    

      After him came the Mother Superior from a distant convent. And when she
      had gone they began ringing for vespers. He had to go to church.
    

      In the evening the monks sang harmoniously, with inspiration. A young
      priest with a black beard conducted the service; and the bishop, hearing
      of the Bridegroom who comes at midnight and of the Heavenly Mansion
      adorned for the festival, felt no repentance for his sins, no tribulation,
      but peace at heart and tranquillity. And he was carried back in thought to
      the distant past, to his childhood and youth, when, too, they used to sing
      of the Bridegroom and of the Heavenly Mansion; and now that past rose up
      before him—living, fair, and joyful as in all likelihood it never
      had been. And perhaps in the other world, in the life to come, we shall
      think of the distant past, of our life here, with the same feeling. Who
      knows? The bishop was sitting near the altar. It was dark; tears flowed
      down his face. He thought that here he had attained everything a man in
      his position could attain; he had faith and yet everything was not clear,
      something was lacking still. He did not want to die; and he still felt
      that he had missed what was most important, something of which he had
      dimly dreamed in the past; and he was troubled by the same hopes for the
      future as he had felt in childhood, at the academy and abroad.
    

      “How well they sing to-day!” he thought, listening to the
      singing. “How nice it is!”
    

      IV
    

      On Thursday he celebrated mass in the cathedral; it was the Washing of
      Feet. When the service was over and the people were going home, it was
      sunny, warm; the water gurgled in the gutters, and the unceasing trilling
      of the larks, tender, telling of peace, rose from the fields outside the
      town. The trees were already awakening and smiling a welcome, while above
      them the infinite, fathomless blue sky stretched into the distance, God
      knows whither.
    

      On reaching home his holiness drank some tea, then changed his clothes,
      lay down on his bed, and told the lay brother to close the shutters on the
      windows. The bedroom was darkened. But what weariness, what pain in his
      legs and his back, a chill heavy pain, what a noise in his ears! He had
      not slept for a long time—for a very long time, as it seemed to him
      now, and some trifling detail which haunted his brain as soon as his eyes
      were closed prevented him from sleeping. As on the day before, sounds
      reached him from the adjoining rooms through the walls, voices, the jingle
      of glasses and teaspoons. . . . Marya Timofyevna was gaily telling Father
      Sisoy some story with quaint turns of speech, while the latter answered in
      a grumpy, ill-humoured voice: “Bother them! Not likely! What next!”
      And the bishop again felt vexed and then hurt that with other people his
      old mother behaved in a simple, ordinary way, while with him, her son, she
      was shy, spoke little, and did not say what she meant, and even, as he
      fancied, had during all those three days kept trying in his presence to
      find an excuse for standing up, because she was embarrassed at sitting
      before him. And his father? He, too, probably, if he had been living,
      would not have been able to utter a word in the bishop’s presence. .
      . .
    

      Something fell down on the floor in the adjoining room and was broken;
      Katya must have dropped a cup or a saucer, for Father Sisoy suddenly spat
      and said angrily:
    

      “What a regular nuisance the child is! Lord forgive my
      transgressions! One can’t provide enough for her.”
    

      Then all was quiet, the only sounds came from outside. And when the bishop
      opened his eyes he saw Katya in his room, standing motionless, staring at
      him. Her red hair, as usual, stood up from under the comb like a halo.
    

      “Is that you, Katya?” he asked. “Who is it downstairs
      who keeps opening and shutting a door?”
    

      “I don’t hear it,” answered Katya; and she listened.
    

      “There, someone has just passed by.”
    

      “But that was a noise in your stomach, uncle.”
    

      He laughed and stroked her on the head.
    

      “So you say Cousin Nikolasha cuts up dead people?” he asked
      after a pause.
    

      “Yes, he is studying.”
    

      “And is he kind?”
    

      “Oh, yes, he’s kind. But he drinks vodka awfully.”
    

      “And what was it your father died of?”
    

      “Papa was weak and very, very thin, and all at once his throat was
      bad. I was ill then, too, and brother Fedya; we all had bad throats. Papa
      died, uncle, and we got well.”
    

      Her chin began quivering, and tears gleamed in her eyes and trickled down
      her cheeks.
    

      “Your holiness,” she said in a shrill voice, by now weeping
      bitterly, “uncle, mother and all of us are left very wretched. . . .
      Give us a little money . . . do be kind . . . uncle darling. . . .”
    

      He, too, was moved to tears, and for a long time was too much touched to
      speak. Then he stroked her on the head, patted her on the shoulder and
      said:
    

      “Very good, very good, my child. When the holy Easter comes, we will
      talk it over. . . . I will help you. . . . I will help you. . . .”
    

      His mother came in quietly, timidly, and prayed before the ikon. Noticing
      that he was not sleeping, she said:
    

      “Won’t you have a drop of soup?”
    

      “No, thank you,” he answered, “I am not hungry.”
    

      “You seem to be unwell, now I look at you. I should think so; you
      may well be ill! The whole day on your legs, the whole day. . . . And, my
      goodness, it makes one’s heart ache even to look at you! Well,
      Easter is not far off; you will rest then, please God. Then we will have a
      talk, too, but now I’m not going to disturb you with my chatter.
      Come along, Katya; let his holiness sleep a little.”
    

      And he remembered how once very long ago, when he was a boy, she had
      spoken exactly like that, in the same jestingly respectful tone, with a
      Church dignitary. . . . Only from her extraordinarily kind eyes and the
      timid, anxious glance she stole at him as she went out of the room could
      one have guessed that this was his mother. He shut his eyes and seemed to
      sleep, but twice heard the clock strike and Father Sisoy coughing the
      other side of the wall. And once more his mother came in and looked
      timidly at him for a minute. Someone drove up to the steps, as he could
      hear, in a coach or in a chaise. Suddenly a knock, the door slammed, the
      lay brother came into the bedroom.
    

      “Your holiness,” he called.
    

      “Well?”
    

      “The horses are here; it’s time for the evening service.”
    

      “What o’clock is it?”
    

      “A quarter past seven.”
    

      He dressed and drove to the cathedral. During all the “Twelve
      Gospels” he had to stand in the middle of the church without moving,
      and the first gospel, the longest and the most beautiful, he read himself.
      A mood of confidence and courage came over him. That first gospel, “Now
      is the Son of Man glorified,” he knew by heart; and as he read he
      raised his eyes from time to time, and saw on both sides a perfect sea of
      lights and heard the splutter of candles, but, as in past years, he could
      not see the people, and it seemed as though these were all the same people
      as had been round him in those days, in his childhood and his youth; that
      they would always be the same every year and till such time as God only
      knew.
    

      His father had been a deacon, his grandfather a priest, his
      great-grandfather a deacon, and his whole family, perhaps from the days
      when Christianity had been accepted in Russia, had belonged to the
      priesthood; and his love for the Church services, for the priesthood, for
      the peal of the bells, was deep in him, ineradicable, innate. In church,
      particularly when he took part in the service, he felt vigorous, of good
      cheer, happy. So it was now. Only when the eighth gospel had been read, he
      felt that his voice had grown weak, even his cough was inaudible. His head
      had begun to ache intensely, and he was troubled by a fear that he might
      fall down. And his legs were indeed quite numb, so that by degrees he
      ceased to feel them and could not understand how or on what he was
      standing, and why he did not fall. . . .
    

      It was a quarter to twelve when the service was over. When he reached
      home, the bishop undressed and went to bed at once without even saying his
      prayers. He could not speak and felt that he could not have stood up. When
      he had covered his head with the quilt he felt a sudden longing to be
      abroad, an insufferable longing! He felt that he would give his life not
      to see those pitiful cheap shutters, those low ceilings, not to smell that
      heavy monastery smell. If only there were one person to whom he could have
      talked, have opened his heart!
    

      For a long while he heard footsteps in the next room and could not tell
      whose they were. At last the door opened, and Sisoy came in with a candle
      and a tea-cup in his hand.
    

      “You are in bed already, your holiness?” he asked. “Here
      I have come to rub you with spirit and vinegar. A thorough rubbing does a
      great deal of good. Lord Jesus Christ! . . . That’s the way . . .
      that’s the way. . . . I’ve just been in our monastery. . . . I
      don’t like it. I’m going away from here to-morrow, your
      holiness; I don’t want to stay longer. Lord Jesus Christ. . . . That’s
      the way. . . .”
    

      Sisoy could never stay long in the same place, and he felt as though he
      had been a whole year in the Pankratievsky Monastery. Above all, listening
      to him it was difficult to understand where his home was, whether he cared
      for anyone or anything, whether he believed in God. . . . He did not know
      himself why he was a monk, and, indeed, he did not think about it, and the
      time when he had become a monk had long passed out of his memory; it
      seemed as though he had been born a monk.
    

      “I’m going away to-morrow; God be with them all.”
    

      “I should like to talk to you. . . . I can’t find the time,”
      said the bishop softly with an effort. “I don’t know anything
      or anybody here. . . .”
    

      “I’ll stay till Sunday if you like; so be it, but I don’t
      want to stay longer. I am sick of them!”
    

      “I ought not to be a bishop,” said the bishop softly. “I
      ought to have been a village priest, a deacon . . . or simply a monk. . .
      . All this oppresses me . . . oppresses me.”
    

      “What? Lord Jesus Christ. . . . That’s the way. Come, sleep
      well, your holiness! . . . What’s the good of talking? It’s no
      use. Good-night!”
    

      The bishop did not sleep all night. And at eight o’clock in the
      morning he began to have hemorrhage from the bowels. The lay brother was
      alarmed, and ran first to the archimandrite, then for the monastery
      doctor, Ivan Andreyitch, who lived in the town. The doctor, a stout old
      man with a long grey beard, made a prolonged examination of the bishop,
      and kept shaking his head and frowning, then said:
    

      “Do you know, your holiness, you have got typhoid?”
    

      After an hour or so of hemorrhage the bishop looked much thinner, paler,
      and wasted; his face looked wrinkled, his eyes looked bigger, and he
      seemed older, shorter, and it seemed to him that he was thinner, weaker,
      more insignificant than any one, that everything that had been had
      retreated far, far away and would never go on again or be repeated.
    

      “How good,” he thought, “how good!”
    

      His old mother came. Seeing his wrinkled face and his big eyes, she was
      frightened, she fell on her knees by the bed and began kissing his face,
      his shoulders, his hands. And to her, too, it seemed that he was thinner,
      weaker, and more insignificant than anyone, and now she forgot that he was
      a bishop, and kissed him as though he were a child very near and very dear
      to her.
    

      “Pavlusha, darling,” she said; “my own, my darling son!
      . . . Why are you like this? Pavlusha, answer me!”
    

      Katya, pale and severe, stood beside her, unable to understand what was
      the matter with her uncle, why there was such a look of suffering on her
      grandmother’s face, why she was saying such sad and touching things.
      By now he could not utter a word, he could understand nothing, and he
      imagined he was a simple ordinary man, that he was walking quickly,
      cheerfully through the fields, tapping with his stick, while above him was
      the open sky bathed in sunshine, and that he was free now as a bird and
      could go where he liked!
    

      “Pavlusha, my darling son, answer me,” the old woman was
      saying. “What is it? My own!”
    

      “Don’t disturb his holiness,” Sisoy said angrily,
      walking about the room. “Let him sleep . . . what’s the use .
      . . it’s no good. . . .”
    

      Three doctors arrived, consulted together, and went away again. The day
      was long, incredibly long, then the night came on and passed slowly,
      slowly, and towards morning on Saturday the lay brother went in to the old
      mother who was lying on the sofa in the parlour, and asked her to go into
      the bedroom: the bishop had just breathed his last.
    

      Next day was Easter Sunday. There were forty-two churches and six
      monasteries in the town; the sonorous, joyful clang of the bells hung over
      the town from morning till night unceasingly, setting the spring air
      aquiver; the birds were singing, the sun was shining brightly. The big
      market square was noisy, swings were going, barrel organs were playing,
      accordions were squeaking, drunken voices were shouting. After midday
      people began driving up and down the principal street.
    

      In short, all was merriment, everything was satisfactory, just as it had
      been the year before, and as it will be in all likelihood next year.
    

      A month later a new suffragan bishop was appointed, and no one thought
      anything more of Bishop Pyotr, and afterwards he was completely forgotten.
      And only the dead man’s old mother, who is living to-day with her
      son-in-law the deacon in a remote little district town, when she goes out
      at night to bring her cow in and meets other women at the pasture, begins
      talking of her children and her grandchildren, and says that she had a son
      a bishop, and this she says timidly, afraid that she may not be believed.
      . . .
    

      And, indeed, there are some who do not believe her.
    











      THE LETTER
    

The clerical
      superintendent of the district, his Reverence Father Fyodor Orlov, a
      handsome, well-nourished man of fifty, grave and important as he always
      was, with an habitual expression of dignity that never left his face, was
      walking to and fro in his little drawing-room, extremely exhausted, and
      thinking intensely about the same thing: “When would his visitor go?”
      The thought worried him and did not leave him for a minute. The visitor,
      Father Anastasy, the priest of one of the villages near the town, had come
      to him three hours before on some very unpleasant and dreary business of
      his own, had stayed on and on, was now sitting in the corner at a little
      round table with his elbow on a thick account book, and apparently had no
      thought of going, though it was getting on for nine o’clock in the
      evening.
    

      Not everyone knows when to be silent and when to go. It not infrequently
      happens that even diplomatic persons of good worldly breeding fail to
      observe that their presence is arousing a feeling akin to hatred in their
      exhausted or busy host, and that this feeling is being concealed with an
      effort and disguised with a lie. But Father Anastasy perceived it clearly,
      and realized that his presence was burdensome and inappropriate, that his
      Reverence, who had taken an early morning service in the night and a long
      mass at midday, was exhausted and longing for repose; every minute he was
      meaning to get up and go, but he did not get up, he sat on as though he
      were waiting for something. He was an old man of sixty-five, prematurely
      aged, with a bent and bony figure, with a sunken face and the dark skin of
      old age, with red eyelids and a long narrow back like a fish’s; he
      was dressed in a smart cassock of a light lilac colour, but too big for
      him (presented to him by the widow of a young priest lately deceased), a
      full cloth coat with a broad leather belt, and clumsy high boots the size
      and hue of which showed clearly that Father Anastasy dispensed with
      goloshes. In spite of his position and his venerable age, there was
      something pitiful, crushed and humiliated in his lustreless red eyes, in
      the strands of grey hair with a shade of green in it on the nape of his
      neck, and in the big shoulder-blades on his lean back. . . . He sat
      without speaking or moving, and coughed with circumspection, as though
      afraid that the sound of his coughing might make his presence more
      noticeable.
    

      The old man had come to see his Reverence on business. Two months before
      he had been prohibited from officiating till further notice, and his case
      was being inquired into. His shortcomings were numerous. He was
      intemperate in his habits, fell out with the other clergy and the commune,
      kept the church records and accounts carelessly —these were the
      formal charges against him; but besides all that, there had been rumours
      for a long time past that he celebrated unlawful marriages for money and
      sold certificates of having fasted and taken the sacrament to officials
      and officers who came to him from the town. These rumours were maintained
      the more persistently that he was poor and had nine children to keep, who
      were as incompetent and unsuccessful as himself. The sons were spoilt and
      uneducated, and stayed at home doing nothing, while the daughters were
      ugly and did not get married.
    

      Not having the moral force to be open, his Reverence walked up and down
      the room and said nothing or spoke in hints.
    

      “So you are not going home to-night?” he asked, stopping near
      the dark window and poking with his little finger into the cage where a
      canary was asleep with its feathers puffed out.
    

      Father Anastasy started, coughed cautiously and said rapidly:
    

      “Home? I don’t care to, Fyodor Ilyitch. I cannot officiate, as
      you know, so what am I to do there? I came away on purpose that I might
      not have to look the people in the face. One is ashamed not to officiate,
      as you know. Besides, I have business here, Fyodor Ilyitch. To-morrow
      after breaking the fast I want to talk things over thoroughly with the
      Father charged with the inquiry.”
    

      “Ah! . . .” yawned his Reverence, “and where are you
      staying?”
    

      “At Zyavkin’s.”
    

      Father Anastasy suddenly remembered that within two hours his Reverence
      had to take the Easter-night service, and he felt so ashamed of his
      unwelcome burdensome presence that he made up his mind to go away at once
      and let the exhausted man rest. And the old man got up to go. But before
      he began saying good-bye he stood clearing his throat for a minute and
      looking searchingly at his Reverence’s back, still with the same
      expression of vague expectation in his whole figure; his face was working
      with shame, timidity, and a pitiful forced laugh such as one sees in
      people who do not respect themselves. Waving his hand as it were
      resolutely, he said with a husky quavering laugh:
    

      “Father Fyodor, do me one more kindness: bid them give me at
      leave-taking . . . one little glass of vodka.”
    

      “It’s not the time to drink vodka now,” said his
      Reverence sternly. “One must have some regard for decency.”
    

      Father Anastasy was still more overwhelmed by confusion; he laughed, and,
      forgetting his resolution to go away, he dropped back on his chair. His
      Reverence looked at his helpless, embarrassed face and his bent figure and
      he felt sorry for the old man.
    

      “Please God, we will have a drink to-morrow,” he said, wishing
      to soften his stem refusal. “Everything is good in due season.”
    

      His Reverence believed in people’s reforming, but now when a feeling
      of pity had been kindled in him it seemed to him that this disgraced,
      worn-out old man, entangled in a network of sins and weaknesses, was
      hopelessly wrecked, that there was no power on earth that could straighten
      out his spine, give brightness to his eyes and restrain the unpleasant
      timid laugh which he laughed on purpose to smoothe over to some slight
      extent the repulsive impression he made on people.
    

      The old man seemed now to Father Fyodor not guilty and not vicious, but
      humiliated, insulted, unfortunate; his Reverence thought of his wife, his
      nine children, the dirty beggarly shelter at Zyavkin’s; he thought
      for some reason of the people who are glad to see priests drunk and
      persons in authority detected in crimes; and thought that the very best
      thing Father Anastasy could do now would be to die as soon as possible and
      to depart from this world for ever.
    

      There were a sound of footsteps.
    

      “Father Fyodor, you are not resting?” a bass voice asked from
      the passage.
    

      “No, deacon; come in.”
    

      Orlov’s colleague, the deacon Liubimov, an elderly man with a big
      bald patch on the top of his head, though his hair was still black and he
      was still vigorous-looking, with thick black eyebrows like a Georgian’s,
      walked in. He bowed to Father Anastasy and sat down.
    

      “What good news have you?” asked his Reverence.
    

      “What good news?” answered the deacon, and after a pause he
      went on with a smile: “When your children are little, your trouble
      is small; when your children are big, your trouble is great. Such goings
      on, Father Fyodor, that I don’t know what to think of it. It’s
      a regular farce, that’s what it is.”
    

      He paused again for a little, smiled still more broadly and said:
    

      “Nikolay Matveyitch came back from Harkov to-day. He has been
      telling me about my Pyotr. He has been to see him twice, he tells me.”
    

      “What has he been telling you, then?”
    

      “He has upset me, God bless him. He meant to please me but when I
      came to think it over, it seems there is not much to be pleased at. I
      ought to grieve rather than be pleased. . . ‘Your Petrushka,’
      said he, ‘lives in fine style. He is far above us now,’ said
      he. ‘Well thank God for that,’ said I. ‘I dined with
      him,’ said he, ‘and saw his whole manner of life. He lives
      like a gentleman,’ he said; ‘you couldn’t wish to live
      better.’ I was naturally interested and I asked, ‘And what did
      you have for dinner?’ ‘First,’ he said, ‘a fish
      course something like fish soup, then tongue and peas,’ and then he
      said, ‘roast turkey.’ ‘Turkey in Lent? that is something
      to please me,’ said I. ‘Turkey in Lent? Eh?’”
    

      “Nothing marvellous in that,” said his Reverence, screwing up
      his eyes ironically. And sticking both thumbs in his belt, he drew himself
      up and said in the tone in which he usually delivered discourses or gave
      his Scripture lessons to the pupils in the district school: “People
      who do not keep the fasts are divided into two different categories: some
      do not keep them through laxity, others through infidelity. Your Pyotr
      does not keep them through infidelity. Yes.”
    

      The deacon looked timidly at Father Fyodor’s stern face and said:
    

      “There is worse to follow. . . . We talked and discussed one thing
      and another, and it turned out that my infidel of a son is living with
      some madame, another man’s wife. She takes the place of wife and
      hostess in his flat, pours out the tea, receives visitors and all the rest
      of it, as though she were his lawful wife. For over two years he has been
      keeping up this dance with this viper. It’s a regular farce. They
      have been living together for three years and no children.”
    

      “I suppose they have been living in chastity!” chuckled Father
      Anastasy, coughing huskily. “There are children, Father Deacon—
      there are, but they don’t keep them at home! They send them to the
      Foundling! He-he-he! . . .” Anastasy went on coughing till he
      choked.
    

      “Don’t interfere, Father Anastasy,” said his Reverence
      sternly.
    

      “Nikolay Matveyitch asked him, ‘What madame is this helping
      the soup at your table?’” the deacon went on, gloomily
      scanning Anastasy’s bent figure. “‘That is my wife,’
      said he. ‘When was your wedding?’ Nikolay Matveyitch asked
      him, and Pyotr answered, ‘We were married at Kulikov’s
      restaurant.’”
    

      His Reverence’s eyes flashed wrathfully and the colour came into his
      temples. Apart from his sinfulness, Pyotr was not a person he liked.
      Father Fyodor had, as they say, a grudge against him. He remembered him a
      boy at school—he remembered him distinctly, because even then the
      boy had seemed to him not normal. As a schoolboy, Petrushka had been
      ashamed to serve at the altar, had been offended at being addressed
      without ceremony, had not crossed himself on entering the room, and what
      was still more noteworthy, was fond of talking a great deal and with heat—and,
      in Father Fyodor’s opinion, much talking was unseemly in children
      and pernicious to them; moreover Petrushka had taken up a contemptuous and
      critical attitude to fishing, a pursuit to which both his Reverence and
      the deacon were greatly addicted. As a student Pyotr had not gone to
      church at all, had slept till midday, had looked down on people, and had
      been given to raising delicate and insoluble questions with a peculiarly
      provoking zest.
    

      “What would you have?” his Reverence asked, going up to the
      deacon and looking at him angrily. “What would you have? This was to
      be expected! I always knew and was convinced that nothing good would come
      of your Pyotr! I told you so, and I tell you so now. What you have sown,
      that now you must reap! Reap it!”
    

      “But what have I sown, Father Fyodor?” the deacon asked
      softly, looking up at his Reverence.
    

      “Why, who is to blame if not you? You’re his father, he is
      your offspring! You ought to have admonished him, have instilled the fear
      of God into him. A child must be taught! You have brought him into the
      world, but you haven’t trained him up in the right way. It’s a
      sin! It’s wrong! It’s a shame!”
    

      His Reverence forgot his exhaustion, paced to and fro and went on talking.
      Drops of perspiration came out on the deacon’s bald head and
      forehead. He raised his eyes to his Reverence with a look of guilt, and
      said:
    

      “But didn’t I train him, Father Fyodor? Lord have mercy on us,
      haven’t I been a father to my children? You know yourself I spared
      nothing for his good; I have prayed and done my best all my life to give
      him a thorough education. He went to the high school and I got him tutors,
      and he took his degree at the University. And as to my not being able to
      influence his mind, Father Fyodor, why, you can judge for yourself that I
      am not qualified to do so! Sometimes when he used to come here as a
      student, I would begin admonishing him in my way, and he wouldn’t
      heed me. I’d say to him, ‘Go to church,’ and he would
      answer, ‘What for?’ I would begin explaining, and he would
      say, ‘Why? what for?’ Or he would slap me on the shoulder and
      say, ‘Everything in this world is relative, approximate and
      conditional. I don’t know anything, and you don’t know
      anything either, dad.’”
    

      Father Anastasy laughed huskily, cleared his throat and waved his fingers
      in the air as though preparing to say something. His Reverence glanced at
      him and said sternly:
    

      “Don’t interfere, Father Anastasy.”
    

      The old man laughed, beamed, and evidently listened with pleasure to the
      deacon as though he were glad there were other sinful persons in this
      world besides himself. The deacon spoke sincerely, with an aching heart,
      and tears actually came into his eyes. Father Fyodor felt sorry for him.
    

      “You are to blame, deacon, you are to blame,” he said, but not
      so sternly and heatedly as before. “If you could beget him, you
      ought to know how to instruct him. You ought to have trained him in his
      childhood; it’s no good trying to correct a student.”
    

      A silence followed; the deacon clasped his hands and said with a sigh:
    

      “But you know I shall have to answer for him!”
    

      “To be sure you will!”
    

      After a brief silence his Reverence yawned and sighed at the same moment
      and asked:
    

      “Who is reading the ‘Acts’?”
    

      “Yevstrat. Yevstrat always reads them.”
    

      The deacon got up and, looking imploringly at his Reverence, asked:
    

      “Father Fyodor, what am I to do now?”
    

      “Do as you please; you are his father, not I. You ought to know
      best.”
    

      “I don’t know anything, Father Fyodor! Tell me what to do, for
      goodness’ sake! Would you believe it, I am sick at heart! I can’t
      sleep now, nor keep quiet, and the holiday will be no holiday to me. Tell
      me what to do, Father Fyodor!”
    

      “Write him a letter.”
    

      “What am I to write to him?”
    

      “Write that he mustn’t go on like that. Write shortly, but
      sternly and circumstantially, without softening or smoothing away his
      guilt. It is your parental duty; if you write, you will have done your
      duty and will be at peace.”
    

      “That’s true. But what am I to write to him, to what effect?
      If I write to him, he will answer, ‘Why? what for? Why is it a sin?’”
    

      Father Anastasy laughed hoarsely again, and brandished his fingers.
    

      “Why? what for? why is it a sin?” he began shrilly. “I
      was once confessing a gentleman, and I told him that excessive confidence
      in the Divine Mercy is a sin; and he asked, ‘Why?’ I tried to
      answer him, but——” Anastasy slapped himself on the
      forehead. “I had nothing here. He-he-he-he! . . .”
    

      Anastasy’s words, his hoarse jangling laugh at what was not
      laughable, had an unpleasant effect on his Reverence and on the deacon.
      The former was on the point of saying, “Don’t interfere”
      again, but he did not say it, he only frowned.
    

      “I can’t write to him,” sighed the deacon.
    

      “If you can’t, who can?”
    

      “Father Fyodor!” said the deacon, putting his head on one side
      and pressing his hand to his heart. “I am an uneducated slow-witted
      man, while the Lord has vouchsafed you judgment and wisdom. You know
      everything and understand everything. You can master anything, while I don’t
      know how to put my words together sensibly. Be generous. Instruct me how
      to write the letter. Teach me what to say and how to say it. . . .”
    

      “What is there to teach? There is nothing to teach. Sit down and
      write.”
    

      “Oh, do me the favour, Father Fyodor! I beseech you! I know he will
      be frightened and will attend to your letter, because, you see, you are a
      cultivated man too. Do be so good! I’ll sit down, and you’ll
      dictate to me. It will be a sin to write to-morrow, but now would be the
      very time; my mind would be set at rest.”
    

      His Reverence looked at the deacon’s imploring face, thought of the
      disagreeable Pyotr, and consented to dictate. He made the deacon sit down
      to his table and began.
    

      “Well, write . . . ‘Christ is risen, dear son . . .’
      exclamation mark. ‘Rumours have reached me, your father,’ then
      in parenthesis, ‘from what source is no concern of yours . . .’
      close the parenthesis. . . . Have you written it? ‘That you are
      leading a life inconsistent with the laws both of God and of man. Neither
      the luxurious comfort, nor the worldly splendour, nor the culture with
      which you seek outwardly to disguise it, can hide your heathen manner of
      life. In name you are a Christian, but in your real nature a heathen as
      pitiful and wretched as all other heathens—more wretched, indeed,
      seeing that those heathens who know not Christ are lost from ignorance,
      while you are lost in that, possessing a treasure, you neglect it. I will
      not enumerate here your vices, which you know well enough; I will say that
      I see the cause of your ruin in your infidelity. You imagine yourself to
      be wise, boast of your knowledge of science, but refuse to see that
      science without faith, far from elevating a man, actually degrades him to
      the level of a lower animal, inasmuch as. . .’” The whole
      letter was in this strain.
    

      When he had finished writing it the deacon read it aloud, beamed all over
      and jumped up.
    

      “It’s a gift, it’s really a gift!” he said,
      clasping his hands and looking enthusiastically at his Reverence. “To
      think of the Lord’s bestowing a gift like that! Eh? Holy Mother! I
      do believe I couldn’t write a letter like that in a hundred years.
      Lord save you!”
    

      Father Anastasy was enthusiastic too.
    

      “One couldn’t write like that without a gift,” he said,
      getting up and wagging his fingers—“that one couldn’t!
      His rhetoric would trip any philosopher and shut him up. Intellect.
      Brilliant intellect! If you weren’t married, Father Fyodor, you
      would have been a bishop long ago, you would really!”
    

      Having vented his wrath in a letter, his Reverence felt relieved; his
      fatigue and exhaustion came back to him. The deacon was an old friend, and
      his Reverence did not hesitate to say to him:
    

      “Well deacon, go, and God bless you. I’ll have half an hour’s
      nap on the sofa; I must rest.”
    

      The deacon went away and took Anastasy with him. As is always the case on
      Easter Eve, it was dark in the street, but the whole sky was sparkling
      with bright luminous stars. There was a scent of spring and holiday in the
      soft still air.
    

      “How long was he dictating?” the deacon said admiringly.
      “Ten minutes, not more! It would have taken someone else a month to
      compose such a letter. Eh! What a mind! Such a mind that I don’t
      know what to call it! It’s a marvel! It’s really a marvel!”
    

      “Education!” sighed Anastasy as he crossed the muddy street;
      holding up his cassock to his waist. “It’s not for us to
      compare ourselves with him. We come of the sacristan class, while he has
      had a learned education. Yes, he’s a real man, there is no denying
      that.”
    

      “And you listen how he’ll read the Gospel in Latin at mass
      to-day! He knows Latin and he knows Greek. . . . Ah Petrushka, Petrushka!”
      the deacon said, suddenly remembering. “Now that will make him
      scratch his head! That will shut his mouth, that will bring it home to
      him! Now he won’t ask ‘Why.’ It is a case of one wit to
      outwit another! Haha-ha!”
    

      The deacon laughed gaily and loudly. Since the letter had been written to
      Pyotr he had become serene and more cheerful. The consciousness of having
      performed his duty as a father and his faith in the power of the letter
      had brought back his mirthfulness and good-humour.
    

      “Pyotr means a stone,” said he, as he went into his house.
      “My Pyotr is not a stone, but a rag. A viper has fastened upon him
      and he pampers her, and hasn’t the pluck to kick her out. Tfoo! To
      think there should be women like that, God forgive me! Eh? Has she no
      shame? She has fastened upon the lad, sticking to him, and keeps him tied
      to her apron strings. . . . Fie upon her!”
    

      “Perhaps it’s not she keeps hold of him, but he of her?”
    

      “She is a shameless one anyway! Not that I am defending Pyotr. . . .
      He’ll catch it. He’ll read the letter and scratch his head! He’ll
      burn with shame!”
    

      “It’s a splendid letter, only you know I wouldn’t send
      it, Father Deacon. Let him alone.”
    

      “What?” said the deacon, disconcerted.
    

      “Why. . . . Don’t send it, deacon! What’s the sense of
      it? Suppose you send it; he reads it, and . . . and what then? You’ll
      only upset him. Forgive him. Let him alone!”
    

      The deacon looked in surprise at Anastasy’s dark face, at his
      unbuttoned cassock, which looked in the dusk like wings, and shrugged his
      shoulders.
    

      “How can I forgive him like that?” he asked. “Why I
      shall have to answer for him to God!”
    

      “Even so, forgive him all the same. Really! And God will forgive you
      for your kindness to him.”
    

      “But he is my son, isn’t he? Ought I not to teach him?”
    

      “Teach him? Of course—why not? You can teach him, but why call
      him a heathen? It will hurt his feelings, you know, deacon. . . .”
    

      The deacon was a widower, and lived in a little house with three windows.
      His elder sister, an old maid, looked after his house for him, though she
      had three years before lost the use of her legs and was confined to her
      bed; he was afraid of her, obeyed her, and did nothing without her advice.
      Father Anastasy went in with him. Seeing his table already laid with
      Easter cakes and red eggs, he began weeping for some reason, probably
      thinking of his own home, and to turn these tears into a jest, he at once
      laughed huskily.
    

      “Yes, we shall soon be breaking the fast,” he said. “Yes
      . . . it wouldn’t come amiss, deacon, to have a little glass now.
      Can we? I’ll drink it so that the old lady does not hear,” he
      whispered, glancing sideways towards the door.
    

      Without a word the deacon moved a decanter and wineglass towards him. He
      unfolded the letter and began reading it aloud. And now the letter pleased
      him just as much as when his Reverence had dictated it to him. He beamed
      with pleasure and wagged his head, as though he had been tasting something
      very sweet.
    

      “A-ah, what a letter!” he said. “Petrushka has never
      dreamt of such a letter. It’s just what he wants, something to throw
      him into a fever. . .”
    

      “Do you know, deacon, don’t send it!” said Anastasy,
      pouring himself out a second glass of vodka as though unconsciously.
      “Forgive him, let him alone! I am telling you . . . what I really
      think. If his own father can’t forgive him, who will forgive him?
      And so he’ll live without forgiveness. Think, deacon: there will be
      plenty to chastise him without you, but you should look out for some who
      will show mercy to your son! I’ll . . . I’ll . . . have just
      one more. The last, old man. . . . Just sit down and write straight off to
      him, ‘I forgive you Pyotr!’ He will under-sta-and! He will
      fe-el it! I understand it from myself, you see old man . . . deacon, I
      mean. When I lived like other people, I hadn’t much to trouble
      about, but now since I lost the image and semblance, there is only one
      thing I care about, that good people should forgive me. And remember, too,
      it’s not the righteous but sinners we must forgive. Why should you
      forgive your old woman if she is not sinful? No, you must forgive a man
      when he is a sad sight to look at . . . yes!”
    

      Anastasy leaned his head on his fist and sank into thought.
    

      “It’s a terrible thing, deacon,” he sighed, evidently
      struggling with the desire to take another glass—“a terrible
      thing! In sin my mother bore me, in sin I have lived, in sin I shall die.
      . . . God forgive me, a sinner! I have gone astray, deacon! There is no
      salvation for me! And it’s not as though I had gone astray in my
      life, but in old age—at death’s door . . . I . . .”
    

      The old man, with a hopeless gesture, drank off another glass, then got up
      and moved to another seat. The deacon, still keeping the letter in his
      hand, was walking up and down the room. He was thinking of his son.
      Displeasure, distress and anxiety no longer troubled him; all that had
      gone into the letter. Now he was simply picturing Pyotr; he imagined his
      face, he thought of the past years when his son used to come to stay with
      him for the holidays. His thoughts were only of what was good, warm,
      touching, of which one might think for a whole lifetime without wearying.
      Longing for his son, he read the letter through once more and looked
      questioningly at Anastasy.
    

      “Don’t send it,” said the latter, with a wave of his
      hand.
    

      “No, I must send it anyway; I must . . . bring him to his senses a
      little, all the same. It’s just as well. . . .”
    

      The deacon took an envelope from the table, but before putting the letter
      into it he sat down to the table, smiled and added on his own account at
      the bottom of the letter:
    

      “They have sent us a new inspector. He’s much friskier than
      the old one. He’s a great one for dancing and talking, and there’s
      nothing he can’t do, so that all the Govorovsky girls are crazy over
      him. Our military chief, Kostyrev, will soon get the sack too, they say.
      High time he did!” And very well pleased, without the faintest idea
      that with this postscript he had completely spoiled the stern letter, the
      deacon addressed the envelope and laid it in the most conspicuous place on
      the table.
    











      EASTER EVE
    

I was standing on
      the bank of the River Goltva, waiting for the ferry-boat from the other
      side. At ordinary times the Goltva is a humble stream of moderate size,
      silent and pensive, gently glimmering from behind thick reeds; but now a
      regular lake lay stretched out before me. The waters of spring, running
      riot, had overflowed both banks and flooded both sides of the river for a
      long distance, submerging vegetable gardens, hayfields and marshes, so
      that it was no unusual thing to meet poplars and bushes sticking out above
      the surface of the water and looking in the darkness like grim solitary
      crags.
    

      The weather seemed to me magnificent. It was dark, yet I could see the
      trees, the water and the people. . . . The world was lighted by the stars,
      which were scattered thickly all over the sky. I don’t remember ever
      seeing so many stars. Literally one could not have put a finger in between
      them. There were some as big as a goose’s egg, others tiny as
      hempseed. . . . They had come out for the festival procession, every one
      of them, little and big, washed, renewed and joyful, and everyone of them
      was softly twinkling its beams. The sky was reflected in the water; the
      stars were bathing in its dark depths and trembling with the quivering
      eddies. The air was warm and still. . . . Here and there, far away on the
      further bank in the impenetrable darkness, several bright red lights were
      gleaming. . . .
    

      A couple of paces from me I saw the dark silhouette of a peasant in a high
      hat, with a thick knotted stick in his hand.
    

      “How long the ferry-boat is in coming!” I said.
    

      “It is time it was here,” the silhouette answered.
    

      “You are waiting for the ferry-boat, too?”
    

      “No I am not,” yawned the peasant—“I am waiting
      for the illumination. I should have gone, but to tell you the truth, I
      haven’t the five kopecks for the ferry.”
    

      “I’ll give you the five kopecks.”
    

      “No; I humbly thank you. . . . With that five kopecks put up a
      candle for me over there in the monastery. . . . That will be more
      interesting, and I will stand here. What can it mean, no ferry-boat, as
      though it had sunk in the water!”
    

      The peasant went up to the water’s edge, took the rope in his hands,
      and shouted; “Ieronim! Ieron—im!”
    

      As though in answer to his shout, the slow peal of a great bell floated
      across from the further bank. The note was deep and low, as from the
      thickest string of a double bass; it seemed as though the darkness itself
      had hoarsely uttered it. At once there was the sound of a cannon shot. It
      rolled away in the darkness and ended somewhere in the far distance behind
      me. The peasant took off his hat and crossed himself.
    

      ‘“Christ is risen,” he said.
    

      Before the vibrations of the first peal of the bell had time to die away
      in the air a second sounded, after it at once a third, and the darkness
      was filled with an unbroken quivering clamour. Near the red lights fresh
      lights flashed, and all began moving together and twinkling restlessly.
    

      “Ieron—im!” we heard a hollow prolonged shout.
    

      “They are shouting from the other bank,” said the peasant,
      “so there is no ferry there either. Our Ieronim has gone to sleep.”
    

      The lights and the velvety chimes of the bell drew one towards them. . . .
      I was already beginning to lose patience and grow anxious, but behold at
      last, staring into the dark distance, I saw the outline of something very
      much like a gibbet. It was the long-expected ferry. It moved towards us
      with such deliberation that if it had not been that its lines grew
      gradually more definite, one might have supposed that it was standing
      still or moving to the other bank.
    

      “Make haste! Ieronim!” shouted my peasant. “The
      gentleman’s tired of waiting!”
    

      The ferry crawled to the bank, gave a lurch and stopped with a creak. A
      tall man in a monk’s cassock and a conical cap stood on it, holding
      the rope.
    

      “Why have you been so long?” I asked jumping upon the ferry.
    

      “Forgive me, for Christ’s sake,” Ieronim answered
      gently. “Is there no one else?”
    

      “No one. . . .”
    

      Ieronim took hold of the rope in both hands, bent himself to the figure of
      a mark of interrogation, and gasped. The ferry-boat creaked and gave a
      lurch. The outline of the peasant in the high hat began slowly retreating
      from me—so the ferry was moving off. Ieronim soon drew himself up
      and began working with one hand only. We were silent, gazing towards the
      bank to which we were floating. There the illumination for which the
      peasant was waiting had begun. At the water’s edge barrels of tar
      were flaring like huge camp fires. Their reflections, crimson as the
      rising moon, crept to meet us in long broad streaks. The burning barrels
      lighted up their own smoke and the long shadows of men flitting about the
      fire; but further to one side and behind them from where the velvety chime
      floated there was still the same unbroken black gloom. All at once,
      cleaving the darkness, a rocket zigzagged in a golden ribbon up the sky;
      it described an arc and, as though broken to pieces against the sky, was
      scattered crackling into sparks. There was a roar from the bank like a
      far-away hurrah.
    

      “How beautiful!” I said.
    

      “Beautiful beyond words!” sighed Ieronim. “Such a night,
      sir! Another time one would pay no attention to the fireworks, but to-day
      one rejoices in every vanity. Where do you come from?”
    

      I told him where I came from.
    

      “To be sure . . . a joyful day to-day. . . .” Ieronim went on
      in a weak sighing tenor like the voice of a convalescent. “The sky
      is rejoicing and the earth and what is under the earth. All the creatures
      are keeping holiday. Only tell me kind sir, why, even in the time of great
      rejoicing, a man cannot forget his sorrows?”
    

      I fancied that this unexpected question was to draw me into one of those
      endless religious conversations which bored and idle monks are so fond of.
      I was not disposed to talk much, and so I only asked:
    

      “What sorrows have you, father?”
    

      “As a rule only the same as all men, kind sir, but to-day a special
      sorrow has happened in the monastery: at mass, during the reading of the
      Bible, the monk and deacon Nikolay died.”
    

      “Well, it’s God’s will!” I said, falling into the
      monastic tone. “We must all die. To my mind, you ought to rejoice
      indeed. . . . They say if anyone dies at Easter he goes straight to the
      kingdom of heaven.”
    

      “That’s true.”
    

      We sank into silence. The figure of the peasant in the high hat melted
      into the lines of the bank. The tar barrels were flaring up more and more.
    

      “The Holy Scripture points clearly to the vanity of sorrow and so
      does reflection,” said Ieronim, breaking the silence, “but why
      does the heart grieve and refuse to listen to reason? Why does one want to
      weep bitterly?”
    

      Ieronim shrugged his shoulders, turned to me and said quickly:
    

      “If I died, or anyone else, it would not be worth notice perhaps;
      but, you see, Nikolay is dead! No one else but Nikolay! Indeed, it’s
      hard to believe that he is no more! I stand here on my ferry-boat and
      every minute I keep fancying that he will lift up his voice from the bank.
      He always used to come to the bank and call to me that I might not be
      afraid on the ferry. He used to get up from his bed at night on purpose
      for that. He was a kind soul. My God! how kindly and gracious! Many a
      mother is not so good to her child as Nikolay was to me! Lord, save his
      soul!”
    

      Ieronim took hold of the rope, but turned to me again at once.
    

      “And such a lofty intelligence, your honour,” he said in a
      vibrating voice. “Such a sweet and harmonious tongue! Just as they
      will sing immediately at early matins: ‘Oh lovely! oh sweet is Thy
      Voice!’ Besides all other human qualities, he had, too, an
      extraordinary gift!”
    

      “What gift?” I asked.
    

      The monk scrutinized me, and as though he had convinced himself that he
      could trust me with a secret, he laughed good-humouredly.
    

      “He had a gift for writing hymns of praise,” he said. “It
      was a marvel, sir; you couldn’t call it anything else! You would be
      amazed if I tell you about it. Our Father Archimandrite comes from Moscow,
      the Father Sub-Prior studied at the Kazan academy, we have wise monks and
      elders, but, would you believe it, no one could write them; while Nikolay,
      a simple monk, a deacon, had not studied anywhere, and had not even any
      outer appearance of it, but he wrote them! A marvel! A real marvel!”
      Ieronim clasped his hands and, completely forgetting the rope, went on
      eagerly:
    

      “The Father Sub-Prior has great difficulty in composing sermons;
      when he wrote the history of the monastery he worried all the brotherhood
      and drove a dozen times to town, while Nikolay wrote canticles! Hymns of
      praise! That’s a very different thing from a sermon or a history!”
    

      “Is it difficult to write them?” I asked.
    

      “There’s great difficulty!” Ieronim wagged his head.
      “You can do nothing by wisdom and holiness if God has not given you
      the gift. The monks who don’t understand argue that you only need to
      know the life of the saint for whom you are writing the hymn, and to make
      it harmonize with the other hymns of praise. But that’s a mistake,
      sir. Of course, anyone who writes canticles must know the life of the
      saint to perfection, to the least trivial detail. To be sure, one must
      make them harmonize with the other canticles and know where to begin and
      what to write about. To give you an instance, the first response begins
      everywhere with ‘the chosen’ or ‘the elect.’ . . .
      The first line must always begin with the ‘angel.’ In the
      canticle of praise to Jesus the Most Sweet, if you are interested in the
      subject, it begins like this: ‘Of angels Creator and Lord of all
      powers!’ In the canticle to the Holy Mother of God: ‘Of angels
      the foremost sent down from on high,’ to Nikolay, the Wonder-worker—
      ‘An angel in semblance, though in substance a man,’ and so on.
      Everywhere you begin with the angel. Of course, it would be impossible
      without making them harmonize, but the lives of the saints and conformity
      with the others is not what matters; what matters is the beauty and
      sweetness of it. Everything must be harmonious, brief and complete. There
      must be in every line softness, graciousness and tenderness; not one word
      should be harsh or rough or unsuitable. It must be written so that the
      worshipper may rejoice at heart and weep, while his mind is stirred and he
      is thrown into a tremor. In the canticle to the Holy Mother are the words:
      ‘Rejoice, O Thou too high for human thought to reach! Rejoice, O
      Thou too deep for angels’ eyes to fathom!’ In another place in
      the same canticle: ‘Rejoice, O tree that bearest the fair fruit of
      light that is the food of the faithful! Rejoice, O tree of gracious
      spreading shade, under which there is shelter for multitudes!’”
    

      Ieronim hid his face in his hands, as though frightened at something or
      overcome with shame, and shook his head.
    

      “Tree that bearest the fair fruit of light . . . tree of gracious
      spreading shade. . . .” he muttered. “To think that a man
      should find words like those! Such a power is a gift from God! For brevity
      he packs many thoughts into one phrase, and how smooth and complete it all
      is! ‘Light-radiating torch to all that be . . .’ comes in the
      canticle to Jesus the Most Sweet. ‘Light-radiating!’ There is
      no such word in conversation or in books, but you see he invented it, he
      found it in his mind! Apart from the smoothness and grandeur of language,
      sir, every line must be beautified in every way, there must be flowers and
      lightning and wind and sun and all the objects of the visible world. And
      every exclamation ought to be put so as to be smooth and easy for the ear.
      ‘Rejoice, thou flower of heavenly growth!’ comes in the hymn
      to Nikolay the Wonder-worker. It’s not simply ‘heavenly
      flower,’ but ‘flower of heavenly growth.’ It’s
      smoother so and sweet to the ear. That was just as Nikolay wrote it!
      Exactly like that! I can’t tell you how he used to write!”
    

      “Well, in that case it is a pity he is dead,” I said; “but
      let us get on, father, or we shall be late.”
    

      Ieronim started and ran to the rope; they were beginning to peal all the
      bells. Probably the procession was already going on near the monastery,
      for all the dark space behind the tar barrels was now dotted with moving
      lights.
    

      “Did Nikolay print his hymns?” I asked Ieronim.
    

      “How could he print them?” he sighed. “And indeed, it
      would be strange to print them. What would be the object? No one in the
      monastery takes any interest in them. They don’t like them. They
      knew Nikolay wrote them, but they let it pass unnoticed. No one esteems
      new writings nowadays, sir!”
    

      “Were they prejudiced against him?”
    

      “Yes, indeed. If Nikolay had been an elder perhaps the brethren
      would have been interested, but he wasn’t forty, you know. There
      were some who laughed and even thought his writing a sin.”
    

      “What did he write them for?”
    

      “Chiefly for his own comfort. Of all the brotherhood, I was the only
      one who read his hymns. I used to go to him in secret, that no one else
      might know of it, and he was glad that I took an interest in them. He
      would embrace me, stroke my head, speak to me in caressing words as to a
      little child. He would shut his cell, make me sit down beside him, and
      begin to read. . . .”
    

      Ieronim left the rope and came up to me.
    

      “We were dear friends in a way,” he whispered, looking at me
      with shining eyes. “Where he went I would go. If I were not there he
      would miss me. And he cared more for me than for anyone, and all because I
      used to weep over his hymns. It makes me sad to remember. Now I feel just
      like an orphan or a widow. You know, in our monastery they are all good
      people, kind and pious, but . . . there is no one with softness and
      refinement, they are just like peasants. They all speak loudly, and tramp
      heavily when they walk; they are noisy, they clear their throats, but
      Nikolay always talked softly, caressingly, and if he noticed that anyone
      was asleep or praying he would slip by like a fly or a gnat. His face was
      tender, compassionate. . . .”
    

      Ieronim heaved a deep sigh and took hold of the rope again. We were by now
      approaching the bank. We floated straight out of the darkness and
      stillness of the river into an enchanted realm, full of stifling smoke,
      crackling lights and uproar. By now one could distinctly see people moving
      near the tar barrels. The flickering of the lights gave a strange, almost
      fantastic, expression to their figures and red faces. From time to time
      one caught among the heads and faces a glimpse of a horse’s head
      motionless as though cast in copper.
    

      “They’ll begin singing the Easter hymn directly, . . .”
      said Ieronim, “and Nikolay is gone; there is no one to appreciate
      it. . . . There was nothing written dearer to him than that hymn. He used
      to take in every word! You’ll be there, sir, so notice what is sung;
      it takes your breath away!”
    

      “Won’t you be in church, then?”
    

      “I can’t; . . . I have to work the ferry. . . .”
    

      “But won’t they relieve you?”
    

      “I don’t know. . . . I ought to have been relieved at eight;
      but, as you see, they don’t come! . . . And I must own I should have
      liked to be in the church. . . .”
    

      “Are you a monk?”
    

      “Yes . . . that is, I am a lay-brother.”
    

      The ferry ran into the bank and stopped. I thrust a five-kopeck piece into
      Ieronim’s hand for taking me across and jumped on land. Immediately
      a cart with a boy and a sleeping woman in it drove creaking onto the
      ferry. Ieronim, with a faint glow from the lights on his figure, pressed
      on the rope, bent down to it, and started the ferry back. . . .
    

      I took a few steps through mud, but a little farther walked on a soft
      freshly trodden path. This path led to the dark monastery gates, that
      looked like a cavern through a cloud of smoke, through a disorderly crowd
      of people, unharnessed horses, carts and chaises. All this crowd was
      rattling, snorting, laughing, and the crimson light and wavering shadows
      from the smoke flickered over it all . . . . A perfect chaos! And in this
      hubbub the people yet found room to load a little cannon and to sell
      cakes. There was no less commotion on the other side of the wall in the
      monastery precincts, but there was more regard for decorum and order. Here
      there was a smell of juniper and incense. They talked loudly, but there
      was no sound of laughter or snorting. Near the tombstones and crosses
      people pressed close to one another with Easter cakes and bundles in their
      arms. Apparently many had come from a long distance for their cakes to be
      blessed and now were exhausted. Young lay brothers, making a metallic
      sound with their boots, ran busily along the iron slabs that paved the way
      from the monastery gates to the church door. They were busy and shouting
      on the belfry, too.
    

      “What a restless night!” I thought. “How nice!”
    

      One was tempted to see the same unrest and sleeplessness in all nature,
      from the night darkness to the iron slabs, the crosses on the tombs and
      the trees under which the people were moving to and fro. But nowhere was
      the excitement and restlessness so marked as in the church. An unceasing
      struggle was going on in the entrance between the inflowing stream and the
      outflowing stream. Some were going in, others going out and soon coming
      back again to stand still for a little and begin moving again. People were
      scurrying from place to place, lounging about as though they were looking
      for something. The stream flowed from the entrance all round the church,
      disturbing even the front rows, where persons of weight and dignity were
      standing. There could be no thought of concentrated prayer. There were no
      prayers at all, but a sort of continuous, childishly irresponsible joy,
      seeking a pretext to break out and vent itself in some movement, even in
      senseless jostling and shoving.
    

      The same unaccustomed movement is striking in the Easter service itself.
      The altar gates are flung wide open, thick clouds of incense float in the
      air near the candelabra; wherever one looks there are lights, the gleam
      and splutter of candles. . . . There is no reading; restless and
      lighthearted singing goes on to the end without ceasing. After each hymn
      the clergy change their vestments and come out to burn the incense, which
      is repeated every ten minutes.
    

      I had no sooner taken a place, when a wave rushed from in front and forced
      me back. A tall thick-set deacon walked before me with a long red candle;
      the grey-headed archimandrite in his golden mitre hurried after him with
      the censer. When they had vanished from sight the crowd squeezed me back
      to my former position. But ten minutes had not passed before a new wave
      burst on me, and again the deacon appeared. This time he was followed by
      the Father Sub-Prior, the man who, as Ieronim had told me, was writing the
      history of the monastery.
    

      As I mingled with the crowd and caught the infection of the universal
      joyful excitement, I felt unbearably sore on Ieronim’s account. Why
      did they not send someone to relieve him? Why could not someone of less
      feeling and less susceptibility go on the ferry? ‘Lift up thine
      eyes, O Sion, and look around,’ they sang in the choir, ‘for
      thy children have come to thee as to a beacon of divine light from north
      and south, and from east and from the sea. . . .’
    

      I looked at the faces; they all had a lively expression of triumph, but
      not one was listening to what was being sung and taking it in, and not one
      was ‘holding his breath.’ Why was not Ieronim released? I
      could fancy Ieronim standing meekly somewhere by the wall, bending forward
      and hungrily drinking in the beauty of the holy phrase. All this that
      glided by the ears of the people standing by me he would have eagerly
      drunk in with his delicately sensitive soul, and would have been
      spell-bound to ecstasy, to holding his breath, and there would not have
      been a man happier than he in all the church. Now he was plying to and fro
      over the dark river and grieving for his dead friend and brother.
    

      The wave surged back. A stout smiling monk, playing with his rosary and
      looking round behind him, squeezed sideways by me, making way for a lady
      in a hat and velvet cloak. A monastery servant hurried after the lady,
      holding a chair over our heads.
    

      I came out of the church. I wanted to have a look at the dead Nikolay, the
      unknown canticle writer. I walked about the monastery wall, where there
      was a row of cells, peeped into several windows, and, seeing nothing, came
      back again. I do not regret now that I did not see Nikolay; God knows,
      perhaps if I had seen him I should have lost the picture my imagination
      paints for me now. I imagine the lovable poetical figure solitary and not
      understood, who went out at nights to call to Ieronim over the water, and
      filled his hymns with flowers, stars and sunbeams, as a pale timid man
      with soft mild melancholy features. His eyes must have shone, not only
      with intelligence, but with kindly tenderness and that hardly restrained
      childlike enthusiasm which I could hear in Ieronim’s voice when he
      quoted to me passages from the hymns.
    

      When we came out of church after mass it was no longer night. The morning
      was beginning. The stars had gone out and the sky was a morose greyish
      blue. The iron slabs, the tombstones and the buds on the trees were
      covered with dew There was a sharp freshness in the air. Outside the
      precincts I did not find the same animated scene as I had beheld in the
      night. Horses and men looked exhausted, drowsy, scarcely moved, while
      nothing was left of the tar barrels but heaps of black ash. When anyone is
      exhausted and sleepy he fancies that nature, too, is in the same
      condition. It seemed to me that the trees and the young grass were asleep.
      It seemed as though even the bells were not pealing so loudly and gaily as
      at night. The restlessness was over, and of the excitement nothing was
      left but a pleasant weariness, a longing for sleep and warmth.
    

      Now I could see both banks of the river; a faint mist hovered over it in
      shifting masses. There was a harsh cold breath from the water. When I
      jumped on to the ferry, a chaise and some two dozen men and women were
      standing on it already. The rope, wet and as I fancied drowsy, stretched
      far away across the broad river and in places disappeared in the white
      mist.
    

      “Christ is risen! Is there no one else?” asked a soft voice.
    

      I recognized the voice of Ieronim. There was no darkness now to hinder me
      from seeing the monk. He was a tall narrow-shouldered man of
      five-and-thirty, with large rounded features, with half-closed
      listless-looking eyes and an unkempt wedge-shaped beard. He had an
      extraordinarily sad and exhausted look.
    

      “They have not relieved you yet?” I asked in surprise.
    

      “Me?” he answered, turning to me his chilled and dewy face
      with a smile. “There is no one to take my place now till morning.
      They’ll all be going to the Father Archimandrite’s to break
      the fast directly.”
    

      With the help of a little peasant in a hat of reddish fur that looked like
      the little wooden tubs in which honey is sold, he threw his weight on the
      rope; they gasped simultaneously, and the ferry started.
    

      We floated across, disturbing on the way the lazily rising mist. Everyone
      was silent. Ieronim worked mechanically with one hand. He slowly passed
      his mild lustreless eyes over us; then his glance rested on the rosy face
      of a young merchant’s wife with black eyebrows, who was standing on
      the ferry beside me silently shrinking from the mist that wrapped her
      about. He did not take his eyes off her face all the way.
    

      There was little that was masculine in that prolonged gaze. It seemed to
      me that Ieronim was looking in the woman’s face for the soft and
      tender features of his dead friend.
    











      A NIGHTMARE
    

Kunin, a young man
      of thirty, who was a permanent member of the Rural Board, on returning
      from Petersburg to his district, Borisovo, immediately sent a mounted
      messenger to Sinkino, for the priest there, Father Yakov Smirnov.
    

      Five hours later Father Yakov appeared.
    

      “Very glad to make your acquaintance,” said Kunin, meeting him
      in the entry. “I’ve been living and serving here for a year;
      it seems as though we ought to have been acquainted before. You are very
      welcome! But . . . how young you are!” Kunin added in surprise.
      “What is your age?”
    

      “Twenty-eight, . . .” said Father Yakov, faintly pressing
      Kunin’s outstretched hand, and for some reason turning crimson.
    

      Kunin led his visitor into his study and began looking at him more
      attentively.
    

      “What an uncouth womanish face!” he thought.
    

      There certainly was a good deal that was womanish in Father Yakov’s
      face: the turned-up nose, the bright red cheeks, and the large grey-blue
      eyes with scanty, scarcely perceptible eyebrows. His long reddish hair,
      smooth and dry, hung down in straight tails on to his shoulders. The hair
      on his upper lip was only just beginning to form into a real masculine
      moustache, while his little beard belonged to that class of
      good-for-nothing beards which among divinity students are for some reason
      called “ticklers.” It was scanty and extremely transparent; it
      could not have been stroked or combed, it could only have been pinched. .
      . . All these scanty decorations were put on unevenly in tufts, as though
      Father Yakov, thinking to dress up as a priest and beginning to gum on the
      beard, had been interrupted halfway through. He had on a cassock, the
      colour of weak coffee with chicory in it, with big patches on both elbows.
    

      “A queer type,” thought Kunin, looking at his muddy skirts.
      “Comes to the house for the first time and can’t dress
      decently.
    

      “Sit down, Father,” he began more carelessly than cordially,
      as he moved an easy-chair to the table. “Sit down, I beg you.”
    

      Father Yakov coughed into his fist, sank awkwardly on to the edge of the
      chair, and laid his open hands on his knees. With his short figure, his
      narrow chest, his red and perspiring face, he made from the first moment a
      most unpleasant impression on Kunin. The latter could never have imagined
      that there were such undignified and pitiful-looking priests in Russia;
      and in Father Yakov’s attitude, in the way he held his hands on his
      knees and sat on the very edge of his chair, he saw a lack of dignity and
      even a shade of servility.
    

      “I have invited you on business, Father. . . .” Kunin began,
      sinking back in his low chair. “It has fallen to my lot to perform
      the agreeable duty of helping you in one of your useful undertakings. . .
      . On coming back from Petersburg, I found on my table a letter from the
      Marshal of Nobility. Yegor Dmitrevitch suggests that I should take under
      my supervision the church parish school which is being opened in Sinkino.
      I shall be very glad to, Father, with all my heart. . . . More than that,
      I accept the proposition with enthusiasm.”
    

      Kunin got up and walked about the study.
    

      “Of course, both Yegor Dmitrevitch and probably you, too, are aware
      that I have not great funds at my disposal. My estate is mortgaged, and I
      live exclusively on my salary as the permanent member. So that you cannot
      reckon on very much assistance, but I will do all that is in my power. . .
      . And when are you thinking of opening the school Father?”
    

      “When we have the money, . . .” answered Father Yakov.
    

      “You have some funds at your disposal already?”
    

      “Scarcely any. . . . The peasants settled at their meeting that they
      would pay, every man of them, thirty kopecks a year; but that’s only
      a promise, you know! And for the first beginning we should need at least
      two hundred roubles. . . .”
    

      “M’yes. . . . Unhappily, I have not that sum now,” said
      Kunin with a sigh. “I spent all I had on my tour and got into debt,
      too. Let us try and think of some plan together.”
    

      Kunin began planning aloud. He explained his views and watched Father
      Yakov’s face, seeking signs of agreement or approval in it. But the
      face was apathetic and immobile, and expressed nothing but constrained
      shyness and uneasiness. Looking at it, one might have supposed that Kunin
      was talking of matters so abstruse that Father Yakov did not understand
      and only listened from good manners, and was at the same time afraid of
      being detected in his failure to understand.
    

      “The fellow is not one of the brightest, that’s evident . . .”
      thought Kunin. “He’s rather shy and much too stupid.”
    

      Father Yakov revived somewhat and even smiled only when the footman came
      into the study bringing in two glasses of tea on a tray and a cake-basket
      full of biscuits. He took his glass and began drinking at once.
    

      “Shouldn’t we write at once to the bishop?” Kunin went
      on, meditating aloud. “To be precise, you know, it is not we, not
      the Zemstvo, but the higher ecclesiastical authorities, who have raised
      the question of the church parish schools. They ought really to apportion
      the funds. I remember I read that a sum of money had been set aside for
      the purpose. Do you know nothing about it?”
    

      Father Yakov was so absorbed in drinking tea that he did not answer this
      question at once. He lifted his grey-blue eyes to Kunin, thought a moment,
      and as though recalling his question, he shook his head in the negative.
      An expression of pleasure and of the most ordinary prosaic appetite
      overspread his face from ear to ear. He drank and smacked his lips over
      every gulp. When he had drunk it to the very last drop, he put his glass
      on the table, then took his glass back again, looked at the bottom of it,
      then put it back again. The expression of pleasure faded from his face. .
      . . Then Kunin saw his visitor take a biscuit from the cake-basket, nibble
      a little bit off it, then turn it over in his hand and hurriedly stick it
      in his pocket.
    

      “Well, that’s not at all clerical!” thought Kunin,
      shrugging his shoulders contemptuously. “What is it, priestly greed
      or childishness?”
    

      After giving his visitor another glass of tea and seeing him to the entry,
      Kunin lay down on the sofa and abandoned himself to the unpleasant feeling
      induced in him by the visit of Father Yakov.
    

      “What a strange wild creature!” he thought. “Dirty,
      untidy, coarse, stupid, and probably he drinks. . . . My God, and that’s
      a priest, a spiritual father! That’s a teacher of the people! I can
      fancy the irony there must be in the deacon’s face when before every
      mass he booms out: ‘Thy blessing, Reverend Father!’ A fine
      reverend Father! A reverend Father without a grain of dignity or breeding,
      hiding biscuits in his pocket like a schoolboy. . . . Fie! Good Lord,
      where were the bishop’s eyes when he ordained a man like that? What
      can he think of the people if he gives them a teacher like that? One wants
      people here who . . .”
    

      And Kunin thought what Russian priests ought to be like.
    

      “If I were a priest, for instance. . . . An educated priest fond of
      his work might do a great deal. . . . I should have had the school opened
      long ago. And the sermons? If the priest is sincere and is inspired by
      love for his work, what wonderful rousing sermons he might give!”
    

      Kunin shut his eyes and began mentally composing a sermon. A little later
      he sat down to the table and rapidly began writing.
    

      “I’ll give it to that red-haired fellow, let him read it in
      church, . . .” he thought.
    

      The following Sunday Kunin drove over to Sinkino in the morning to settle
      the question of the school, and while he was there to make acquaintance
      with the church of which he was a parishioner. In spite of the awful state
      of the roads, it was a glorious morning. The sun was shining brightly and
      cleaving with its rays the layers of white snow still lingering here and
      there. The snow as it took leave of the earth glittered with such diamonds
      that it hurt the eyes to look, while the young winter corn was hastily
      thrusting up its green beside it. The rooks floated with dignity over the
      fields. A rook would fly, drop to earth, and give several hops before
      standing firmly on its feet. . . .
    

      The wooden church up to which Kunin drove was old and grey; the columns of
      the porch had once been painted white, but the colour had now completely
      peeled off, and they looked like two ungainly shafts. The ikon over the
      door looked like a dark smudged blur. But its poverty touched and softened
      Kunin. Modestly dropping his eyes, he went into the church and stood by
      the door. The service had only just begun. An old sacristan, bent into a
      bow, was reading the “Hours” in a hollow indistinct tenor.
      Father Yakov, who conducted the service without a deacon, was walking
      about the church, burning incense. Had it not been for the softened mood
      in which Kunin found himself on entering the poverty-stricken church, he
      certainly would have smiled at the sight of Father Yakov. The short priest
      was wearing a crumpled and extremely long robe of some shabby yellow
      material; the hem of the robe trailed on the ground.
    

      The church was not full. Looking at the parishioners, Kunin was struck at
      the first glance by one strange circumstance: he saw nothing but old
      people and children. . . . Where were the men of working age? Where was
      the youth and manhood? But after he had stood there a little and looked
      more attentively at the aged-looking faces, Kunin saw that he had mistaken
      young people for old. He did not, however, attach any significance to this
      little optical illusion.
    

      The church was as cold and grey inside as outside. There was not one spot
      on the ikons nor on the dark brown walls which was not begrimed and
      defaced by time. There were many windows, but the general effect of colour
      was grey, and so it was twilight in the church.
    

      “Anyone pure in soul can pray here very well,” thought Kunin.
      “Just as in St. Peter’s in Rome one is impressed by grandeur,
      here one is touched by the lowliness and simplicity.”
    

      But his devout mood vanished like smoke as soon as Father Yakov went up to
      the altar and began mass. Being still young and having come straight from
      the seminary bench to the priesthood, Father Yakov had not yet formed a
      set manner of celebrating the service. As he read he seemed to be
      vacillating between a high tenor and a thin bass; he bowed clumsily,
      walked quickly, and opened and shut the gates abruptly. . . . The old
      sacristan, evidently deaf and ailing, did not hear the prayers very
      distinctly, and this very often led to slight misunderstandings. Before
      Father Yakov had time to finish what he had to say, the sacristan began
      chanting his response, or else long after Father Yakov had finished the
      old man would be straining his ears, listening in the direction of the
      altar and saying nothing till his skirt was pulled. The old man had a
      sickly hollow voice and an asthmatic quavering lisp. . . . The complete
      lack of dignity and decorum was emphasized by a very small boy who
      seconded the sacristan and whose head was hardly visible over the railing
      of the choir. The boy sang in a shrill falsetto and seemed to be trying to
      avoid singing in tune. Kunin stayed a little while, listened and went out
      for a smoke. He was disappointed, and looked at the grey church almost
      with dislike.
    

      “They complain of the decline of religious feeling among the people
      . . .” he sighed. “I should rather think so! They’d
      better foist a few more priests like this one on them!”
    

      Kunin went back into the church three times, and each time he felt a great
      temptation to get out into the open air again. Waiting till the end of the
      mass, he went to Father Yakov’s. The priest’s house did not
      differ outwardly from the peasants’ huts, but the thatch lay more
      smoothly on the roof and there were little white curtains in the windows.
      Father Yakov led Kunin into a light little room with a clay floor and
      walls covered with cheap paper; in spite of some painful efforts towards
      luxury in the way of photographs in frames and a clock with a pair of
      scissors hanging on the weight the furnishing of the room impressed him by
      its scantiness. Looking at the furniture, one might have supposed that
      Father Yakov had gone from house to house and collected it in bits; in one
      place they had given him a round three-legged table, in another a stool,
      in a third a chair with a back bent violently backwards; in a fourth a
      chair with an upright back, but the seat smashed in; while in a fifth they
      had been liberal and given him a semblance of a sofa with a flat back and
      a lattice-work seat. This semblance had been painted dark red and smelt
      strongly of paint. Kunin meant at first to sit down on one of the chairs,
      but on second thoughts he sat down on the stool.
    

      “This is the first time you have been to our church?” asked
      Father Yakov, hanging his hat on a huge misshapen nail.
    

      “Yes it is. I tell you what, Father, before we begin on business,
      will you give me some tea? My soul is parched.”
    

      Father Yakov bElinked, gasped, and went behind the partition wall. There
      was a sound of whispering.
    

      “With his wife, I suppose,” thought Kunin; “it would be
      interesting to see what the red-headed fellow’s wife is like.”
    

      A little later Father Yakov came back, red and perspiring and with an
      effort to smile, sat down on the edge of the sofa.
    

      “They will heat the samovar directly,” he said, without
      looking at his visitor.
    

      “My goodness, they have not heated the samovar yet!” Kunin
      thought with horror. “A nice time we shall have to wait.”
    

      “I have brought you,” he said, “the rough draft of the
      letter I have written to the bishop. I’ll read it after tea; perhaps
      you may find something to add. . . .”
    

      “Very well.”
    

      A silence followed. Father Yakov threw furtive glances at the partition
      wall, smoothed his hair, and blew his nose.
    

      “It’s wonderful weather, . . .” he said.
    

      “Yes. I read an interesting thing yesterday. . . . the Volsky
      Zemstvo have decided to give their schools to the clergy, that’s
      typical.”
    

      Kunin got up, and pacing up and down the clay floor, began to give
      expression to his reflections.
    

      “That would be all right,” he said, “if only the clergy
      were equal to their high calling and recognized their tasks. I am so
      unfortunate as to know priests whose standard of culture and whose moral
      qualities make them hardly fit to be army secretaries, much less priests.
      You will agree that a bad teacher does far less harm than a bad priest.”
    

      Kunin glanced at Father Yakov; he was sitting bent up, thinking intently
      about something and apparently not listening to his visitor.
    

      “Yasha, come here!” a woman’s voice called from behind
      the partition. Father Yakov started and went out. Again a whispering
      began.
    

      Kunin felt a pang of longing for tea.
    

      “No; it’s no use my waiting for tea here,” he thought,
      looking at his watch. “Besides I fancy I am not altogether a welcome
      visitor. My host has not deigned to say one word to me; he simply sits and
      bElinks.”
    

      Kunin took up his hat, waited for Father Yakov to return, and said
      good-bye to him.
    

      “I have simply wasted the morning,” he thought wrathfully on
      the way home. “The blockhead! The dummy! He cares no more about the
      school than I about last year’s snow. . . . No, I shall never get
      anything done with him! We are bound to fail! If the Marshal knew what the
      priest here was like, he wouldn’t be in such a hurry to talk about a
      school. We ought first to try and get a decent priest, and then think
      about the school.”
    

      By now Kunin almost hated Father Yakov. The man, his pitiful, grotesque
      figure in the long crumpled robe, his womanish face, his manner of
      officiating, his way of life and his formal restrained respectfulness,
      wounded the tiny relic of religious feeling which was stored away in a
      warm corner of Kunin’s heart together with his nurse’s other
      fairy tales. The coldness and lack of attention with which Father Yakov
      had met Kunin’s warm and sincere interest in what was the priest’s
      own work was hard for the former’s vanity to endure. . . .
    

      On the evening of the same day Kunin spent a long time walking about his
      rooms and thinking. Then he sat down to the table resolutely and wrote a
      letter to the bishop. After asking for money and a blessing for the
      school, he set forth genuinely, like a son, his opinion of the priest at
      Sinkino.
    

      “He is young,” he wrote, “insufficiently educated,
      leads, I fancy, an intemperate life, and altogether fails to satisfy the
      ideals which the Russian people have in the course of centuries formed of
      what a pastor should be.”
    

      After writing this letter Kunin heaved a deep sigh, and went to bed with
      the consciousness that he had done a good deed.
    

      On Monday morning, while he was still in bed, he was informed that Father
      Yakov had arrived. He did not want to get up, and instructed the servant
      to say he was not at home. On Tuesday he went away to a sitting of the
      Board, and when he returned on Saturday he was told by the servants that
      Father Yakov had called every day in his absence.
    

      “He liked my biscuits, it seems,” he thought.
    

      Towards evening on Sunday Father Yakov arrived. This time not only his
      skirts, but even his hat, was bespattered with mud. Just as on his first
      visit, he was hot and perspiring, and sat down on the edge of his chair as
      he had done then. Kunin determined not to talk about the school—not
      to cast pearls.
    

      “I have brought you a list of books for the school, Pavel
      Mihailovitch, . . .” Father Yakov began.
    

      “Thank you.”
    

      But everything showed that Father Yakov had come for something else
      besides the list. Has whole figure was expressive of extreme
      embarrassment, and at the same time there was a look of determination upon
      his face, as on the face of a man suddenly inspired by an idea. He
      struggled to say something important, absolutely necessary, and strove to
      overcome his timidity.
    

      “Why is he dumb?” Kunin thought wrathfully. “He’s
      settled himself comfortably! I haven’t time to be bothered with him.”
    

      To smoothe over the awkwardness of his silence and to conceal the struggle
      going on within him, the priest began to smile constrainedly, and this
      slow smile, wrung out on his red perspiring face, and out of keeping with
      the fixed look in his grey-blue eyes, made Kunin turn away. He felt moved
      to repulsion.
    

      “Excuse me, Father, I have to go out,” he said.
    

      Father Yakov started like a man asleep who has been struck a blow, and,
      still smiling, began in his confusion wrapping round him the skirts of his
      cassock. In spite of his repulsion for the man, Kunin felt suddenly sorry
      for him, and he wanted to soften his cruelty.
    

      “Please come another time, Father,” he said, “and before
      we part I want to ask you a favour. I was somehow inspired to write two
      sermons the other day. . . . I will give them to you to look at. If they
      are suitable, use them.”
    

      “Very good,” said Father Yakov, laying his open hand on Kunin’s
      sermons which were lying on the table. “I will take them.”
    

      After standing a little, hesitating and still wrapping his cassock round
      him, he suddenly gave up the effort to smile and lifted his head
      resolutely.
    

      “Pavel Mihailovitch,” he said, evidently trying to speak
      loudly and distinctly.
    

      “What can I do for you?”
    

      “I have heard that you . . . er . . . have dismissed your secretary,
      and . . . and are looking for a new one. . . .”
    

      “Yes, I am. . . . Why, have you someone to recommend?”
    

      “I. . . er . . . you see . . . I . . . Could you not give the post
      to me?”
    

      “Why, are you giving up the Church?” said Kunin in amazement.
    

      “No, no,” Father Yakov brought out quickly, for some reason
      turning pale and trembling all over. “God forbid! If you feel
      doubtful, then never mind, never mind. You see, I could do the work
      between whiles, . . so as to increase my income. . . . Never mind, don’t
      disturb yourself!”
    

      “H’m! . . . your income. . . . But you know, I only pay my
      secretary twenty roubles a month.”
    

      “Good heavens! I would take ten,” whispered Father Yakov,
      looking about him. “Ten would be enough! You . . . you are
      astonished, and everyone is astonished. The greedy priest, the grasping
      priest, what does he do with his money? I feel myself I am greedy, . . .
      and I blame myself, I condemn myself. . . . I am ashamed to look people in
      the face. . . . I tell you on my conscience, Pavel Mihailovitch. . . . I
      call the God of truth to witness. . . .”
    

      Father Yakov took breath and went on:
    

      “On the way here I prepared a regular confession to make you, but .
      . . I’ve forgotten it all; I cannot find a word now. I get a hundred
      and fifty roubles a year from my parish, and everyone wonders what I do
      with the money. . . . But I’ll explain it all truly. . . . I pay
      forty roubles a year to the clerical school for my brother Pyotr. He has
      everything found there, except that I have to provide pens and paper.”
    

      “Oh, I believe you; I believe you! But what’s the object of
      all this?” said Kunin, with a wave of the hand, feeling terribly
      oppressed by this outburst of confidence on the part of his visitor, and
      not knowing how to get away from the tearful gleam in his eyes.
    

      “Then I have not yet paid up all that I owe to the consistory for my
      place here. They charged me two hundred roubles for the living, and I was
      to pay ten roubles a month. . . . You can judge what is left! And,
      besides, I must allow Father Avraamy at least three roubles a month.”
    

      “What Father Avraamy?”
    

      “Father Avraamy who was priest at Sinkino before I came. He was
      deprived of the living on account of . . . his failing, but you know, he
      is still living at Sinkino! He has nowhere to go. There is no one to keep
      him. Though he is old, he must have a corner, and food and clothing—I
      can’t let him go begging on the roads in his position! It would be
      on my conscience if anything happened! It would be my fault! He is. . . in
      debt all round; but, you see, I am to blame for not paying for him.”
    

      Father Yakov started up from his seat and, looking frantically at the
      floor, strode up and down the room.
    

      “My God, my God!” he muttered, raising his hands and dropping
      them again. “Lord, save us and have mercy upon us! Why did you take
      such a calling on yourself if you have so little faith and no strength?
      There is no end to my despair! Save me, Queen of Heaven!”
    

      “Calm yourself, Father,” said Kunin.
    

      “I am worn out with hunger, Pavel Mihailovitch,” Father Yakov
      went on. “Generously forgive me, but I am at the end of my strength
      . . . . I know if I were to beg and to bow down, everyone would help, but
      . . . I cannot! I am ashamed. How can I beg of the peasants? You are on
      the Board here, so you know. . . . How can one beg of a beggar? And to beg
      of richer people, of landowners, I cannot! I have pride! I am ashamed!”
    

      Father Yakov waved his hand, and nervously scratched his head with both
      hands.
    

      “I am ashamed! My God, I am ashamed! I am proud and can’t bear
      people to see my poverty! When you visited me, Pavel Mihailovitch, I had
      no tea in the house! There wasn’t a pinch of it, and you know it was
      pride prevented me from telling you! I am ashamed of my clothes, of these
      patches here. . . . I am ashamed of my vestments, of being hungry. . . .
      And is it seemly for a priest to be proud?”
    

      Father Yakov stood still in the middle of the study, and, as though he did
      not notice Kunin’s presence, began reasoning with himself.
    

      “Well, supposing I endure hunger and disgrace—but, my God, I
      have a wife! I took her from a good home! She is not used to hard work;
      she is soft; she is used to tea and white bread and sheets on her bed. . .
      . At home she used to play the piano. . . . She is young, not twenty yet.
      . . . She would like, to be sure, to be smart, to have fun, go out to see
      people. . . . And she is worse off with me than any cook; she is ashamed
      to show herself in the street. My God, my God! Her only treat is when I
      bring an apple or some biscuit from a visit. . . .”
    

      Father Yakov scratched his head again with both hands.
    

      “And it makes us feel not love but pity for each other. . . . I
      cannot look at her without compassion! And the things that happen in this
      life, O Lord! Such things that people would not believe them if they saw
      them in the newspaper. . . . And when will there be an end to it all!”
    

      “Hush, Father!” Kunin almost shouted, frightened at his tone.
      “Why take such a gloomy view of life?”
    

      “Generously forgive me, Pavel Mihailovitch . . .” muttered
      Father Yakov as though he were drunk, “Forgive me, all this . . .
      doesn’t matter, and don’t take any notice of it. . . . Only I
      do blame myself, and always shall blame myself . . . always.”
    

      Father Yakov looked about him and began whispering:
    

      “One morning early I was going from Sinkino to Lutchkovo; I saw a
      woman standing on the river bank, doing something. . . . I went up close
      and could not believe my eyes. . . . It was horrible! The wife of the
      doctor, Ivan Sergeitch, was sitting there washing her linen. . . . A
      doctor’s wife, brought up at a select boarding-school! She had got
      up you see, early and gone half a mile from the village that people should
      not see her. . . . She couldn’t get over her pride! When she saw
      that I was near her and noticed her poverty, she turned red all over. . .
      . I was flustered—I was frightened, and ran up to help her, but she
      hid her linen from me; she was afraid I should see her ragged chemises. .
      . .”
    

      “All this is positively incredible,” said Kunin, sitting down
      and looking almost with horror at Father Yakov’s pale face.
    

      “Incredible it is! It’s a thing that has never been! Pavel
      Mihailovitch, that a doctor’s wife should be rinsing the linen in
      the river! Such a thing does not happen in any country! As her pastor and
      spiritual father, I ought not to allow it, but what can I do? What? Why, I
      am always trying to get treated by her husband for nothing myself! It is
      true that, as you say, it is all incredible! One can hardly believe one’s
      eyes. During Mass, you know, when I look out from the altar and see my
      congregation, Avraamy starving, and my wife, and think of the doctor’s
      wife—how blue her hands were from the cold water—would you
      believe it, I forget myself and stand senseless like a fool, until the
      sacristan calls to me. . . . It’s awful!”
    

      Father Yakov began walking about again.
    

      “Lord Jesus!” he said, waving his hands, “holy Saints! I
      can’t officiate properly. . . . Here you talk to me about the
      school, and I sit like a dummy and don’t understand a word, and
      think of nothing but food. . . . Even before the altar. . . . But . . .
      what am I doing?” Father Yakov pulled himself up suddenly. “You
      want to go out. Forgive me, I meant nothing. . . . Excuse . . .”
    

      Kunin shook hands with Father Yakov without speaking, saw him into the
      hall, and going back into his study, stood at the window. He saw Father
      Yakov go out of the house, pull his wide-brimmed rusty-looking hat over
      his eyes, and slowly, bowing his head, as though ashamed of his outburst,
      walk along the road.
    

      “I don’t see his horse,” thought Kunin.
    

      Kunin did not dare to think that the priest had come on foot every day to
      see him; it was five or six miles to Sinkino, and the mud on the road was
      impassable. Further on he saw the coachman Andrey and the boy Paramon,
      jumping over the puddles and splashing Father Yakov with mud, run up to
      him for his blessing. Father Yakov took off his hat and slowly blessed
      Andrey, then blessed the boy and stroked his head.
    

      Kunin passed his hand over his eyes, and it seemed to him that his hand
      was moist. He walked away from the window and with dim eyes looked round
      the room in which he still seemed to hear the timid droning voice. He
      glanced at the table. Luckily, Father Yakov, in his haste, had forgotten
      to take the sermons. Kunin rushed up to them, tore them into pieces, and
      with loathing thrust them under the table.
    

      “And I did not know!” he moaned, sinking on to the sofa.
      “After being here over a year as member of the Rural Board, Honorary
      Justice of the Peace, member of the School Committee! Blind puppet,
      egregious idiot! I must make haste and help them, I must make haste!”
    

      He turned from side to side uneasily, pressed his temples and racked his
      brains.
    

      “On the twentieth I shall get my salary, two hundred roubles. . . .
      On some good pretext I will give him some, and some to the doctor’s
      wife. . . . I will ask them to perform a special service here, and will
      get up an illness for the doctor. . . . In that way I shan’t wound
      their pride. And I’ll help Father Avraamy too. . . .”
    

      He reckoned his money on his fingers, and was afraid to own to himself
      that those two hundred roubles would hardly be enough for him to pay his
      steward, his servants, the peasant who brought the meat. . . . He could
      not help remembering the recent past when he was senselessly squandering
      his father’s fortune, when as a puppy of twenty he had given
      expensive fans to prostitutes, had paid ten roubles a day to Kuzma, his
      cab-driver, and in his vanity had made presents to actresses. Oh, how
      useful those wasted rouble, three-rouble, ten-rouble notes would have been
      now!
    

      “Father Avraamy lives on three roubles a month!” thought
      Kunin. “For a rouble the priest’s wife could get herself a
      chemise, and the doctor’s wife could hire a washerwoman. But I’ll
      help them, anyway! I must help them.”
    

      Here Kunin suddenly recalled the private information he had sent to the
      bishop, and he writhed as from a sudden draught of cold air. This
      remembrance filled him with overwhelming shame before his inner self and
      before the unseen truth.
    

      So had begun and had ended a sincere effort to be of public service on the
      part of a well-intentioned but unreflecting and over-comfortable person.
    











      THE MURDER
    

      I
    

The evening service
      was being celebrated at Progonnaya Station. Before the great ikon, painted
      in glaring colours on a background of gold, stood the crowd of railway
      servants with their wives and children, and also of the timbermen and
      sawyers who worked close to the railway line. All stood in silence,
      fascinated by the glare of the lights and the howling of the snow-storm
      which was aimlessly disporting itself outside, regardless of the fact that
      it was the Eve of the Annunciation. The old priest from Vedenyapino
      conducted the service; the sacristan and Matvey Terehov were singing.
    

      Matvey’s face was beaming with delight; he sang stretching out his
      neck as though he wanted to soar upwards. He sang tenor and chanted the
      “Praises” too in a tenor voice with honied sweetness and
      persuasiveness. When he sang “Archangel Voices” he waved his
      arms like a conductor, and trying to second the sacristan’s hollow
      bass with his tenor, achieved something extremely complex, and from his
      face it could be seen that he was experiencing great pleasure.
    

      At last the service was over, and they all quietly dispersed, and it was
      dark and empty again, and there followed that hush which is only known in
      stations that stand solitary in the open country or in the forest when the
      wind howls and nothing else is heard and when all the emptiness around,
      all the dreariness of life slowly ebbing away is felt.
    

      Matvey lived not far from the station at his cousin’s tavern. But he
      did not want to go home. He sat down at the refreshment bar and began
      talking to the waiter in a low voice.
    

      “We had our own choir in the tile factory. And I must tell you that
      though we were only workmen, our singing was first-rate, splendid. We were
      often invited to the town, and when the Deputy Bishop, Father Ivan, took
      the service at Trinity Church, the bishop’s singers sang in the
      right choir and we in the left. Only they complained in the town that we
      kept the singing on too long: ‘the factory choir drag it out,’
      they used to say. It is true we began St. Andrey’s prayers and the
      Praises between six and seven, and it was past eleven when we finished, so
      that it was sometimes after midnight when we got home to the factory. It
      was good,” sighed Matvey. “Very good it was, indeed, Sergey
      Nikanoritch! But here in my father’s house it is anything but
      joyful. The nearest church is four miles away; with my weak health I can’t
      get so far; there are no singers there. And there is no peace or quiet in
      our family; day in day out, there is an uproar, scolding, uncleanliness;
      we all eat out of one bowl like peasants; and there are beetles in the
      cabbage soup. . . . God has not given me health, else I would have gone
      away long ago, Sergey Nikanoritch.”
    

      Matvey Terehov was a middle-aged man about forty-five, but he had a look
      of ill-health; his face was wrinkled and his lank, scanty beard was quite
      grey, and that made him seem many years older. He spoke in a weak voice,
      circumspectly, and held his chest when he coughed, while his eyes assumed
      the uneasy and anxious look one sees in very apprehensive people. He never
      said definitely what was wrong with him, but he was fond of describing at
      length how once at the factory he had lifted a heavy box and had ruptured
      himself, and how this had led to “the gripes,” and had forced
      him to give up his work in the tile factory and come back to his native
      place; but he could not explain what he meant by “the gripes.”
    

      “I must own I am not fond of my cousin,” he went on, pouring
      himself out some tea. “He is my elder; it is a sin to censure him,
      and I fear the Lord, but I cannot bear it in patience. He is a haughty,
      surly, abusive man; he is the torment of his relations and workmen, and
      constantly out of humour. Last Sunday I asked him in an amiable way,
      ‘Brother, let us go to Pahomovo for the Mass!’ but he said
      ‘I am not going; the priest there is a gambler;’ and he would
      not come here to-day because, he said, the priest from Vedenyapino smokes
      and drinks vodka. He doesn’t like the clergy! He reads Mass himself
      and the Hours and the Vespers, while his sister acts as sacristan; he
      says, ‘Let us pray unto the Lord’! and she, in a thin little
      voice like a turkey-hen, ‘Lord, have mercy upon us! . . .’ It’s
      a sin, that’s what it is. Every day I say to him, ‘Think what
      you are doing, brother! Repent, brother!’ and he takes no notice.”
    

      Sergey Nikanoritch, the waiter, poured out five glasses of tea and carried
      them on a tray to the waiting-room. He had scarcely gone in when there was
      a shout:
    

      “Is that the way to serve it, pig’s face? You don’t know
      how to wait!”
    

      It was the voice of the station-master. There was a timid mutter, then
      again a harsh and angry shout:
    

      “Get along!”
    

      The waiter came back greatly crestfallen.
    

      “There was a time when I gave satisfaction to counts and princes,”
      he said in a low voice; “but now I don’t know how to serve
      tea. . . . He called me names before the priest and the ladies!”
    

      The waiter, Sergey Nikanoritch, had once had money of his own, and had
      kept a buffet at a first-class station, which was a junction, in the
      principal town of a province. There he had worn a swallow-tail coat and a
      gold chain. But things had gone ill with him; he had squandered all his
      own money over expensive fittings and service; he had been robbed by his
      staff, and getting gradually into difficulties, had moved to another
      station less bustling. Here his wife had left him, taking with her all the
      silver, and he moved to a third station of a still lower class, where no
      hot dishes were served. Then to a fourth. Frequently changing his
      situation and sinking lower and lower, he had at last come to Progonnaya,
      and here he used to sell nothing but tea and cheap vodka, and for lunch
      hard-boiled eggs and dry sausages, which smelt of tar, and which he
      himself sarcastically said were only fit for the orchestra. He was bald
      all over the top of his head, and had prominent blue eyes and thick bushy
      whiskers, which he often combed out, looking into the little
      looking-glass. Memories of the past haunted him continually; he could
      never get used to sausage “only fit for the orchestra,” to the
      rudeness of the station-master, and to the peasants who used to haggle
      over the prices, and in his opinion it was as unseemly to haggle over
      prices in a refreshment room as in a chemist’s shop. He was ashamed
      of his poverty and degradation, and that shame was now the leading
      interest of his life.
    

      “Spring is late this year,” said Matvey, listening. “It’s
      a good job; I don’t like spring. In spring it is very muddy, Sergey
      Nikanoritch. In books they write: Spring, the birds sing, the sun is
      setting, but what is there pleasant in that? A bird is a bird, and nothing
      more. I am fond of good company, of listening to folks, of talking of
      religion or singing something agreeable in chorus; but as for nightingales
      and flowers—bless them, I say!”
    

      He began again about the tile factory, about the choir, but Sergey
      Nikanoritch could not get over his mortification, and kept shrugging his
      shoulders and muttering. Matvey said good-bye and went home.
    

      There was no frost, and the snow was already melting on the roofs, though
      it was still falling in big flakes; they were whirling rapidly round and
      round in the air and chasing one another in white clouds along the railway
      line. And the oak forest on both sides of the line, in the dim light of
      the moon which was hidden somewhere high up in the clouds, resounded with
      a prolonged sullen murmur. When a violent storm shakes the trees, how
      terrible they are! Matvey walked along the causeway beside the line,
      covering his face and his hands, while the wind beat on his back. All at
      once a little nag, plastered all over with snow, came into sight; a sledge
      scraped along the bare stones of the causeway, and a peasant, white all
      over, too, with his head muffled up, cracked his whip. Matvey looked round
      after him, but at once, as though it had been a vision, there was neither
      sledge nor peasant to be seen, and he hastened his steps, suddenly scared,
      though he did not know why.
    

      Here was the crossing and the dark little house where the signalman lived.
      The barrier was raised, and by it perfect mountains had drifted and clouds
      of snow were whirling round like witches on broomsticks. At that point the
      line was crossed by an old highroad, which was still called “the
      track.” On the right, not far from the crossing, by the roadside
      stood Terehov’s tavern, which had been a posting inn. Here there was
      always a light twinkling at night.
    

      When Matvey reached home there was a strong smell of incense in all the
      rooms and even in the entry. His cousin Yakov Ivanitch was still reading
      the evening service. In the prayer-room where this was going on, in the
      corner opposite the door, there stood a shrine of old-fashioned ancestral
      ikons in gilt settings, and both walls to right and to left were decorated
      with ikons of ancient and modern fashion, in shrines and without them. On
      the table, which was draped to the floor, stood an ikon of the
      Annunciation, and close by a cyprus-wood cross and the censer; wax candles
      were burning. Beside the table was a reading desk. As he passed by the
      prayer-room, Matvey stopped and glanced in at the door. Yakov Ivanitch was
      reading at the desk at that moment, his sister Aglaia, a tall lean old
      woman in a dark-blue dress and white kerchief, was praying with him. Yakov
      Ivanitch’s daughter Dashutka, an ugly freckled girl of eighteen, was
      there, too, barefoot as usual, and wearing the dress in which she had at
      nightfall taken water to the cattle.
    

      “Glory to Thee Who hast shown us the light!” Yakov Ivanitch
      boomed out in a chant, bowing low.
    

      Aglaia propped her chin on her hand and chanted in a thin, shrill,
      drawling voice. And upstairs, above the ceiling, there was the sound of
      vague voices which seemed menacing or ominous of evil. No one had lived on
      the storey above since a fire there a long time ago. The windows were
      boarded up, and empty bottles lay about on the floor between the beams.
      Now the wind was banging and droning, and it seemed as though someone were
      running and stumbling over the beams.
    

      Half of the lower storey was used as a tavern, while Terehov’s
      family lived in the other half, so that when drunken visitors were noisy
      in the tavern every word they said could be heard in the rooms. Matvey
      lived in a room next to the kitchen, with a big stove, in which, in old
      days, when this had been a posting inn, bread had been baked every day.
      Dashutka, who had no room of her own, lived in the same room behind the
      stove. A cricket chirped there always at night and mice ran in and out.
    

      Matvey lighted a candle and began reading a book which he had borrowed
      from the station policeman. While he was sitting over it the service
      ended, and they all went to bed. Dashutka lay down, too. She began snoring
      at once, but soon woke up and said, yawning:
    

      “You shouldn’t burn a candle for nothing, Uncle Matvey.”
    

      “It’s my candle,” answered Matvey; “I bought it
      with my own money.”
    

      Dashutka turned over a little and fell asleep again. Matvey sat up a good
      time longer—he was not sleepy—and when he had finished the
      last page he took a pencil out of a box and wrote on the book:
    

      “I, Matvey Terehov, have read this book, and think it the very best
      of all the books I have read, for which I express my gratitude to the
      non-commissioned officer of the Police Department of Railways, Kuzma
      Nikolaev Zhukov, as the possessor of this priceless book.”
    

      He considered it an obligation of politeness to make such inscriptions in
      other people’s books.
    

      II
    

      On Annunciation Day, after the mail train had been sent off, Matvey was
      sitting in the refreshment bar, talking and drinking tea with lemon in it.
    

      The waiter and Zhukov the policeman were listening to him.
    

      “I was, I must tell you,” Matvey was saying, “inclined
      to religion from my earliest childhood. I was only twelve years old when I
      used to read the epistle in church, and my parents were greatly delighted,
      and every summer I used to go on a pilgrimage with my dear mother.
      Sometimes other lads would be singing songs and catching crayfish, while I
      would be all the time with my mother. My elders commended me, and, indeed,
      I was pleased myself that I was of such good behaviour. And when my mother
      sent me with her blessing to the factory, I used between working hours to
      sing tenor there in our choir, and nothing gave me greater pleasure. I
      needn’t say, I drank no vodka, I smoked no tobacco, and lived in
      chastity; but we all know such a mode of life is displeasing to the enemy
      of mankind, and he, the unclean spirit, once tried to ruin me and began to
      darken my mind, just as now with my cousin. First of all, I took a vow to
      fast every Monday and not to eat meat any day, and as time went on all
      sorts of fancies came over me. For the first week of Lent down to Saturday
      the holy fathers have ordained a diet of dry food, but it is no sin for
      the weak or those who work hard even to drink tea, yet not a crumb passed
      into my mouth till the Sunday, and afterwards all through Lent I did not
      allow myself a drop of oil, and on Wednesdays and Fridays I did not touch
      a morsel at all. It was the same in the lesser fasts. Sometimes in St.
      Peter’s fast our factory lads would have fish soup, while I would
      sit a little apart from them and suck a dry crust. Different people have
      different powers, of course, but I can say of myself I did not find fast
      days hard, and, indeed, the greater the zeal the easier it seems. You are
      only hungry on the first days of the fast, and then you get used to it; it
      goes on getting easier, and by the end of a week you don’t mind it
      at all, and there is a numb feeling in your legs as though you were not on
      earth, but in the clouds. And, besides that, I laid all sorts of penances
      on myself; I used to get up in the night and pray, bowing down to the
      ground, used to drag heavy stones from place to place, used to go out
      barefoot in the snow, and I even wore chains, too. Only, as time went on,
      you know, I was confessing one day to the priest and suddenly this
      reflection occurred to me: why, this priest, I thought, is married, he
      eats meat and smokes tobacco—how can he confess me, and what power
      has he to absolve my sins if he is more sinful that I? I even scruple to
      eat Lenten oil, while he eats sturgeon, I dare say. I went to another
      priest, and he, as ill luck would have it, was a fat fleshy man, in a silk
      cassock; he rustled like a lady, and he smelt of tobacco too. I went to
      fast and confess in the monastery, and my heart was not at ease even
      there; I kept fancying the monks were not living according to their rules.
      And after that I could not find a service to my mind: in one place they
      read the service too fast, in another they sang the wrong prayer, in a
      third the sacristan stammered. Sometimes, the Lord forgive me a sinner, I
      would stand in church and my heart would throb with anger. How could one
      pray, feeling like that? And I fancied that the people in the church did
      not cross themselves properly, did not listen properly; wherever I looked
      it seemed to me that they were all drunkards, that they broke the fast,
      smoked, lived loose lives and played cards. I was the only one who lived
      according to the commandments. The wily spirit did not slumber; it got
      worse as it went on. I gave up singing in the choir and I did not go to
      church at all; since my notion was that I was a righteous man and that the
      church did not suit me owing to its imperfections—that is, indeed,
      like a fallen angel, I was puffed up in my pride beyond all belief. After
      this I began attempting to make a church for myself. I hired from a deaf
      woman a tiny little room, a long way out of town near the cemetery, and
      made a prayer-room like my cousin’s, only I had big church
      candlesticks, too, and a real censer. In this prayer-room of mine I kept
      the rules of holy Mount Athos—that is, every day my matins began at
      midnight without fail, and on the eve of the chief of the twelve great
      holy days my midnight service lasted ten hours and sometimes even twelve.
      Monks are allowed by rule to sit during the singing of the Psalter and the
      reading of the Bible, but I wanted to be better than the monks, and so I
      used to stand all through. I used to read and sing slowly, with tears and
      sighing, lifting up my hands, and I used to go straight from prayer to
      work without sleeping; and, indeed, I was always praying at my work, too.
      Well, it got all over the town ‘Matvey is a saint; Matvey heals the
      sick and senseless.’ I never had healed anyone, of course, but we
      all know wherever any heresy or false doctrine springs up there’s no
      keeping the female sex away. They are just like flies on the honey. Old
      maids and females of all sorts came trailing to me, bowing down to my
      feet, kissing my hands and crying out I was a saint and all the rest of
      it, and one even saw a halo round my head. It was too crowded in the
      prayer-room. I took a bigger room, and then we had a regular tower of
      Babel. The devil got hold of me completely and screened the light from my
      eyes with his unclean hoofs. We all behaved as though we were frantic. I
      read, while the old maids and other females sang, and then after standing
      on their legs for twenty-four hours or longer without eating or drinking,
      suddenly a trembling would come over them as though they were in a fever;
      after that, one would begin screaming and then another—it was
      horrible! I, too, would shiver all over like a Jew in a frying-pan, I don’t
      know myself why, and our legs began to prance about. It’s a strange
      thing, indeed: you don’t want to, but you prance about and waggle
      your arms; and after that, screaming and shrieking, we all danced and ran
      after one another —ran till we dropped; and in that way, in wild
      frenzy, I fell into fornication.”
    

      The policeman laughed, but, noticing that no one else was laughing, became
      serious and said:
    

      “That’s Molokanism. I have heard they are all like that in the
      Caucasus.”
    

      “But I was not killed by a thunderbolt,” Matvey went on,
      crossing himself before the ikon and moving his lips. “My dead
      mother must have been praying for me in the other world. When everyone in
      the town looked upon me as a saint, and even the ladies and gentlemen of
      good family used to come to me in secret for consolation, I happened to go
      into our landlord, Osip Varlamitch, to ask forgiveness —it was the
      Day of Forgiveness—and he fastened the door with the hook, and we
      were left alone face to face. And he began to reprove me, and I must tell
      you Osip Varlamitch was a man of brains, though without education, and
      everyone respected and feared him, for he was a man of stern, God-fearing
      life and worked hard. He had been the mayor of the town, and a warden of
      the church for twenty years maybe, and had done a great deal of good; he
      had covered all the New Moscow Road with gravel, had painted the church,
      and had decorated the columns to look like malachite. Well, he fastened
      the door, and—‘I have been wanting to get at you for a long
      time, you rascal, . . .’ he said. ‘You think you are a saint,’
      he said. ‘No you are not a saint, but a backslider from God, a
      heretic and an evildoer! . . .’ And he went on and on. . . . I can’t
      tell you how he said it, so eloquently and cleverly, as though it were all
      written down, and so touchingly. He talked for two hours. His words
      penetrated my soul; my eyes were opened. I listened, listened and —burst
      into sobs! ‘Be an ordinary man,’ he said, ‘eat and
      drink, dress and pray like everyone else. All that is above the ordinary
      is of the devil. Your chains,’ he said, ‘are of the devil;
      your fasting is of the devil; your prayer-room is of the devil. It is all
      pride,’ he said. Next day, on Monday in Holy Week, it pleased God I
      should fall ill. I ruptured myself and was taken to the hospital. I was
      terribly worried, and wept bitterly and trembled. I thought there was a
      straight road before me from the hospital to hell, and I almost died. I
      was in misery on a bed of sickness for six months, and when I was
      discharged the first thing I did I confessed, and took the sacrament in
      the regular way and became a man again. Osip Varlamitch saw me off home
      and exhorted me: ‘Remember, Matvey, that anything above the ordinary
      is of the devil.’ And now I eat and drink like everyone else and
      pray like everyone else . . . . If it happens now that the priest smells
      of tobacco or vodka I don’t venture to blame him, because the
      priest, too, of course, is an ordinary man. But as soon as I am told that
      in the town or in the village a saint has set up who does not eat for
      weeks, and makes rules of his own, I know whose work it is. So that is how
      I carried on in the past, gentlemen. Now, like Osip Varlamitch, I am
      continually exhorting my cousins and reproaching them, but I am a voice
      crying in the wilderness. God has not vouchsafed me the gift.”
    

      Matvey’s story evidently made no impression whatever. Sergey
      Nikanoritch said nothing, but began clearing the refreshments off the
      counter, while the policeman began talking of how rich Matvey’s
      cousin was.
    

      “He must have thirty thousand at least,” he said.
    

      Zhukov the policeman, a sturdy, well-fed, red-haired man with a full face
      (his cheeks quivered when he walked), usually sat lolling and crossing his
      legs when not in the presence of his superiors. As he talked he swayed to
      and fro and whistled carelessly, while his face had a self-satisfied
      replete air, as though he had just had dinner. He was making money, and he
      always talked of it with the air of a connoisseur. He undertook jobs as an
      agent, and when anyone wanted to sell an estate, a horse or a carriage,
      they applied to him.
    

      “Yes, it will be thirty thousand, I dare say,” Sergey
      Nikanoritch assented. “Your grandfather had an immense fortune,”
      he said, addressing Matvey. “Immense it was; all left to your father
      and your uncle. Your father died as a young man and your uncle got hold of
      it all, and afterwards, of course, Yakov Ivanitch. While you were going
      pilgrimages with your mama and singing tenor in the factory, they didn’t
      let the grass grow under their feet.”
    

      “Fifteen thousand comes to your share,” said the policeman
      swaying from side to side. “The tavern belongs to you in common, so
      the capital is in common. Yes. If I were in your place I should have taken
      it into court long ago. I would have taken it into court for one thing,
      and while the case was going on I’d have knocked his face to a
      jelly.”
    

      Yakov Ivanitch was disliked because, when anyone believes differently from
      others, it upsets even people who are indifferent to religion. The
      policeman disliked him also because he, too, sold horses and carriages.
    

      “You don’t care about going to law with your cousin because
      you have plenty of money of your own,” said the waiter to Matvey,
      looking at him with envy. “It is all very well for anyone who has
      means, but here I shall die in this position, I suppose. . . .”
    

      Matvey began declaring that he hadn’t any money at all, but Sergey
      Nikanoritch was not listening. Memories of the past and of the insults
      which he endured every day came showering upon him. His bald head began to
      perspire; he flushed and bElinked.
    

      “A cursed life!” he said with vexation, and he banged the
      sausage on the floor.
    

      III
    

      The story ran that the tavern had been built in the time of Alexander I,
      by a widow who had settled here with her son; her name was Avdotya
      Terehov. The dark roofed-in courtyard and the gates always kept locked
      excited, especially on moonlight nights, a feeling of depression and
      unaccountable uneasiness in people who drove by with posting-horses, as
      though sorcerers or robbers were living in it; and the driver always
      looked back after he passed, and whipped up his horses. Travellers did not
      care to put up here, as the people of the house were always unfriendly and
      charged heavily. The yard was muddy even in summer; huge fat pigs used to
      lie there in the mud, and the horses in which the Terehovs dealt wandered
      about untethered, and often it happened that they ran out of the yard and
      dashed along the road like mad creatures, terrifying the pilgrim women. At
      that time there was a great deal of traffic on the road; long trains of
      loaded waggons trailed by, and all sorts of adventures happened, such as,
      for instance, that thirty years ago some waggoners got up a quarrel with a
      passing merchant and killed him, and a slanting cross is standing to this
      day half a mile from the tavern; posting-chaises with bells and the heavy
      dormeuses of country gentlemen drove by; and herds of horned cattle
      passed bellowing and stirring up clouds of dust.
    

      When the railway came there was at first at this place only a platform,
      which was called simply a halt; ten years afterwards the present station,
      Progonnaya, was built. The traffic on the old posting-road almost ceased,
      and only local landowners and peasants drove along it now, but the working
      people walked there in crowds in spring and autumn. The posting-inn was
      transformed into a restaurant; the upper storey was destroyed by fire, the
      roof had grown yellow with rust, the roof over the yard had fallen by
      degrees, but huge fat pigs, pink and revolting, still wallowed in the mud
      in the yard. As before, the horses sometimes ran away and, lashing their
      tails dashed madly along the road. In the tavern they sold tea, hay oats
      and flour, as well as vodka and beer, to be drunk on the premises and also
      to be taken away; they sold spirituous liquors warily, for they had never
      taken out a licence.
    

      The Terehovs had always been distinguished by their piety, so much so that
      they had even been given the nickname of the “Godlies.” But
      perhaps because they lived apart like bears, avoided people and thought
      out all their ideas for themselves, they were given to dreams and to
      doubts and to changes of faith and almost each generation had a peculiar
      faith of its own. The grandmother Avdotya, who had built the inn, was an
      Old Believer; her son and both her grandsons (the fathers of Matvey and
      Yakov) went to the Orthodox church, entertained the clergy, and worshipped
      before the new ikons as devoutly as they had done before the old. The son
      in old age refused to eat meat and imposed upon himself the rule of
      silence, considering all conversation as sin; it was the peculiarity of
      the grandsons that they interpreted the Scripture not simply, but sought
      in it a hidden meaning, declaring that every sacred word must contain a
      mystery.
    

      Avdotya’s great-grandson Matvey had struggled from early childhood
      with all sorts of dreams and fancies and had been almost ruined by it; the
      other great-grandson, Yakov Ivanitch, was orthodox, but after his wife’s
      death he gave up going to church and prayed at home. Following his
      example, his sister Aglaia had turned, too; she did not go to church
      herself, and did not let Dashutka go. Of Aglaia it was told that in her
      youth she used to attend the Flagellant meetings in Vedenyapino, and that
      she was still a Flagellant in secret, and that was why she wore a white
      kerchief.
    

      Yakov Ivanitch was ten years older than Matvey—he was a very
      handsome tall old man with a big grey beard almost to his waist, and bushy
      eyebrows which gave his face a stern, even ill-natured expression. He wore
      a long jerkin of good cloth or a black sheepskin coat, and altogether
      tried to be clean and neat in dress; he wore goloshes even in dry weather.
      He did not go to church, because, to his thinking, the services were not
      properly celebrated and because the priests drank wine at unlawful times
      and smoked tobacco. Every day he read and sang the service at home with
      Aglaia. At Vedenyapino they left out the “Praises” at early
      matins, and had no evening service even on great holidays, but he used to
      read through at home everything that was laid down for every day, without
      hurrying or leaving out a single line, and even in his spare time read
      aloud the Lives of the Saints. And in everyday life he adhered strictly to
      the rules of the church; thus, if wine were allowed on some day in Lent
      “for the sake of the vigil,” then he never failed to drink
      wine, even if he were not inclined.
    

      He read, sang, burned incense and fasted, not for the sake of receiving
      blessings of some sort from God, but for the sake of good order. Man
      cannot live without religion, and religion ought to be expressed from year
      to year and from day to day in a certain order, so that every morning and
      every evening a man might turn to God with exactly those words and
      thoughts that were befitting that special day and hour. One must live,
      and, therefore, also pray as is pleasing to God, and so every day one must
      read and sing what is pleasing to God—that is, what is laid down in
      the rule of the church. Thus the first chapter of St. John must only be
      read on Easter Day, and “It is most meet” must not be sung
      from Easter to Ascension, and so on. The consciousness of this order and
      its importance afforded Yakov Ivanitch great gratification during his
      religious exercises. When he was forced to break this order by some
      necessity—to drive to town or to the bank, for instance his
      conscience was uneasy and he felt miserable.
    

      When his cousin Matvey had returned unexpectedly from the factory and
      settled in the tavern as though it were his home, he had from the very
      first day disturbed his settled order. He refused to pray with them, had
      meals and drank tea at wrong times, got up late, drank milk on Wednesdays
      and Fridays on the pretext of weak health; almost every day he went into
      the prayer-room while they were at prayers and cried: “Think what
      you are doing, brother! Repent, brother!” These words threw Yakov
      into a fury, while Aglaia could not refrain from beginning to scold; or at
      night Matvey would steal into the prayer-room and say softly: “Cousin,
      your prayer is not pleasing to God. For it is written, First be reconciled
      with thy brother and then offer thy gift. You lend money at usury, you
      deal in vodka—repent!”
    

      In Matvey’s words Yakov saw nothing but the usual evasions of
      empty-headed and careless people who talk of loving your neighbour, of
      being reconciled with your brother, and so on, simply to avoid praying,
      fasting and reading holy books, and who talk contemptuously of profit and
      interest simply because they don’t like working. Of course, to be
      poor, save nothing, and put by nothing was a great deal easier than being
      rich.
    

      But yet he was troubled and could not pray as before. As soon as he went
      into the prayer-room and opened the book he began to be afraid his cousin
      would come in and hinder him; and, in fact, Matvey did soon appear and cry
      in a trembling voice: “Think what you are doing, brother! Repent,
      brother!” Aglaia stormed and Yakov, too, flew into a passion and
      shouted: “Go out of my house!” while Matvey answered him:
      “The house belongs to both of us.”
    

      Yakov would begin singing and reading again, but he could not regain his
      calm, and unconsciously fell to dreaming over his book. Though he regarded
      his cousin’s words as nonsense, yet for some reason it had of late
      haunted his memory that it is hard for a rich man to enter the kingdom of
      heaven, that the year before last he had made a very good bargain over
      buying a stolen horse, that one day when his wife was alive a drunkard had
      died of vodka in his tavern. . . .
    

      He slept badly at nights now and woke easily, and he could hear that
      Matvey, too, was awake, and continually sighing and pining for his tile
      factory. And while Yakov turned over from one side to another at night he
      thought of the stolen horse and the drunken man, and what was said in the
      gospels about the camel.
    

      It looked as though his dreaminess were coming over him again. And as
      ill-luck would have it, although it was the end of March, every day it
      kept snowing, and the forest roared as though it were winter, and there
      was no believing that spring would ever come. The weather disposed one to
      depression, and to quarrelling and to hatred and in the night, when the
      wind droned over the ceiling, it seemed as though someone were living
      overhead in the empty storey; little by little the broodings settled like
      a burden on his mind, his head burned and he could not sleep.
    

      IV
    

      On the morning of the Monday before Good Friday, Matvey heard from his
      room Dashutka say to Aglaia:
    

      “Uncle Matvey said, the other day, that there is no need to fast.”
    

      Matvey remembered the whole conversation he had had the evening before
      with Dashutka, and he felt hurt all at once.
    

      “Girl, don’t do wrong!” he said in a moaning voice, like
      a sick man. “You can’t do without fasting; our Lord Himself
      fasted forty days. I only explained that fasting does a bad man no good.”
    

      “You should just listen to the factory hands; they can teach you
      goodness,” Aglaia said sarcastically as she washed the floor (she
      usually washed the floors on working days and was always angry with
      everyone when she did it). “We know how they keep the fasts in the
      factory. You had better ask that uncle of yours—ask him about his
      ‘Darling,’ how he used to guzzle milk on fast days with her,
      the viper. He teaches others; he forgets about his viper. But ask him who
      was it he left his money with—who was it?”
    

      Matvey had carefully concealed from everyone, as though it were a foul
      sore, that during that period of his life when old women and unmarried
      girls had danced and run about with him at their prayers he had formed a
      connection with a working woman and had had a child by her. When he went
      home he had given this woman all he had saved at the factory, and had
      borrowed from his landlord for his journey, and now he had only a few
      roubles which he spent on tea and candles. The “Darling” had
      informed him later on that the child was dead, and asked him in a letter
      what she should do with the money. This letter was brought from the
      station by the labourer. Aglaia intercepted it and read it, and had
      reproached Matvey with his “Darling” every day since.
    

      “Just fancy, nine hundred roubles,” Aglaia went on. “You
      gave nine hundred roubles to a viper, no relation, a factory jade, blast
      you!” She had flown into a passion by now and was shouting shrilly:
      “Can’t you speak? I could tear you to pieces, wretched
      creature! Nine hundred roubles as though it were a farthing. You might
      have left it to Dashutka—she is a relation, not a stranger—or
      else have it sent to Byelev for Marya’s poor orphans. And your viper
      did not choke, may she be thrice accursed, the she-devil! May she never
      look upon the light of day!”
    

      Yakov Ivanitch called to her: it was time to begin the “Hours.”
      She washed, put on a white kerchief, and by now quiet and meek, went into
      the prayer-room to the brother she loved. When she spoke to Matvey or
      served peasants in the tavern with tea she was a gaunt, keen-eyed,
      ill-humoured old woman; in the prayer-room her face was serene and
      softened, she looked younger altogether, she curtsied affectedly, and even
      pursed up her lips.
    

      Yakov Ivanitch began reading the service softly and dolefully, as he
      always did in Lent. After he had read a little he stopped to listen to the
      stillness that reigned through the house, and then went on reading again,
      with a feeling of gratification; he folded his hands in supplication,
      rolled his eyes, shook his head, sighed. But all at once there was the
      sound of voices. The policeman and Sergey Nikanoritch had come to see
      Matvey. Yakov Ivanitch was embarrassed at reading aloud and singing when
      there were strangers in the house, and now, hearing voices, he began
      reading in a whisper and slowly. He could hear in the prayer-room the
      waiter say:
    

      “The Tatar at Shtchepovo is selling his business for fifteen
      hundred. He’ll take five hundred down and an I.O.U. for the rest.
      And so, Matvey Vassilitch, be so kind as to lend me that five hundred
      roubles. I will pay you two per cent a month.”
    

      “What money have I got?” cried Matvey, amazed. “I have
      no money!”
    

      “Two per cent a month will be a godsend to you,” the policeman
      explained. “While lying by, your money is simply eaten by the moth,
      and that’s all that you get from it.”
    

      Afterwards the visitors went out and a silence followed. But Yakov
      Ivanitch had hardly begun reading and singing again when a voice was heard
      outside the door:
    

      “Brother, let me have a horse to drive to Vedenyapino.”
    

      It was Matvey. And Yakov was troubled again. “Which can you go with?”
      he asked after a moment’s thought. “The man has gone with the
      sorrel to take the pig, and I am going with the little stallion to
      Shuteykino as soon as I have finished.”
    

      “Brother, why is it you can dispose of the horses and not I?”
      Matvey asked with irritation.
    

      “Because I am not taking them for pleasure, but for work.”
    

      “Our property is in common, so the horses are in common, too, and
      you ought to understand that, brother.”
    

      A silence followed. Yakov did not go on praying, but waited for Matvey to
      go away from the door.
    

      “Brother,” said Matvey, “I am a sick man. I don’t
      want possession —let them go; you have them, but give me a small
      share to keep me in my illness. Give it me and I’ll go away.”
    

      Yakov did not speak. He longed to be rid of Matvey, but he could not give
      him money, since all the money was in the business; besides, there had
      never been a case of the family dividing in the whole history of the
      Terehovs. Division means ruin.
    

      Yakov said nothing, but still waited for Matvey to go away, and kept
      looking at his sister, afraid that she would interfere, and that there
      would be a storm of abuse again, as there had been in the morning. When at
      last Matvey did go Yakov went on reading, but now he had no pleasure in
      it. There was a heaviness in his head and a darkness before his eyes from
      continually bowing down to the ground, and he was weary of the sound of
      his soft dejected voice. When such a depression of spirit came over him at
      night, he put it down to not being able to sleep; by day it frightened
      him, and he began to feel as though devils were sitting on his head and
      shoulders.
    

      Finishing the service after a fashion, dissatisfied and ill-humoured, he
      set off for Shuteykino. In the previous autumn a gang of navvies had dug a
      boundary ditch near Progonnaya, and had run up a bill at the tavern for
      eighteen roubles, and now he had to find their foreman in Shuteykino and
      get the money from him. The road had been spoilt by the thaw and the
      snowstorm; it was of a dark colour and full of holes, and in parts it had
      given way altogether. The snow had sunk away at the sides below the road,
      so that he had to drive, as it were, upon a narrow causeway, and it was
      very difficult to turn off it when he met anything. The sky had been
      overcast ever since the morning and a damp wind was blowing. . . .
    

      A long train of sledges met him; peasant women were carting bricks. Yakov
      had to turn off the road. His horse sank into the snow up to its belly;
      the sledge lurched over to the right, and to avoid falling out he bent
      over to the left, and sat so all the time the sledges moved slowly by him.
      Through the wind he heard the creaking of the sledge poles and the
      breathing of the gaunt horses, and the women saying about him, “There’s
      Godly coming,” while one, gazing with compassion at his horse, said
      quickly:
    

      “It looks as though the snow will be lying till Yegory’s Day!
      They are worn out with it!”
    

      Yakov sat uncomfortably huddled up, screwing up his eyes on account of the
      wind, while horses and red bricks kept passing before him. And perhaps
      because he was uncomfortable and his side ached, he felt all at once
      annoyed, and the business he was going about seemed to him unimportant,
      and he reflected that he might send the labourer next day to Shuteykino.
      Again, as in the previous sleepless night, he thought of the saying about
      the camel, and then memories of all sorts crept into his mind; of the
      peasant who had sold him the stolen horse, of the drunken man, of the
      peasant women who had brought their samovars to him to pawn. Of course,
      every merchant tries to get as much as he can, but Yakov felt depressed
      that he was in trade; he longed to get somewhere far away from this
      routine, and he felt dreary at the thought that he would have to read the
      evening service that day. The wind blew straight into his face and soughed
      in his collar; and it seemed as though it were whispering to him all these
      thoughts, bringing them from the broad white plain . . . . Looking at that
      plain, familiar to him from childhood, Yakov remembered that he had had
      just this same trouble and these same thoughts in his young days when
      dreams and imaginings had come upon him and his faith had wavered.
    

      He felt miserable at being alone in the open country; he turned back and
      drove slowly after the sledges, and the women laughed and said:
    

      “Godly has turned back.”
    

      At home nothing had been cooked and the samovar was not heated on account
      of the fast, and this made the day seem very long. Yakov Ivanitch had long
      ago taken the horse to the stable, dispatched the flour to the station,
      and twice taken up the Psalms to read, and yet the evening was still far
      off. Aglaia has already washed all the floors, and, having nothing to do,
      was tidying up her chest, the lid of which was pasted over on the inside
      with labels off bottles. Matvey, hungry and melancholy, sat reading, or
      went up to the Dutch stove and slowly scrutinized the tiles which reminded
      him of the factory. Dashutka was asleep; then, waking up, she went to take
      water to the cattle. When she was getting water from the well the cord
      broke and the pail fell in. The labourer began looking for a boathook to
      get the pail out, and Dashutka, barefooted, with legs as red as a goose’s,
      followed him about in the muddy snow, repeating: “It’s too
      far!” She meant to say that the well was too deep for the hook to
      reach the bottom, but the labourer did not understand her, and evidently
      she bothered him, so that he suddenly turned around and abused her in
      unseemly language. Yakov Ivanitch, coming out that moment into the yard,
      heard Dashutka answer the labourer in a long rapid stream of choice abuse,
      which she could only have learned from drunken peasants in the tavern.
    

      “What are you saying, shameless girl!” he cried to her, and he
      was positively aghast. “What language!”
    

      And she looked at her father in perplexity, dully, not understanding why
      she should not use those words. He would have admonished her, but she
      struck him as so savage and benighted; and for the first time he realized
      that she had no religion. And all this life in the forest, in the snow,
      with drunken peasants, with coarse oaths, seemed to him as savage and
      benighted as this girl, and instead of giving her a lecture he only waved
      his hand and went back into the room.
    

      At that moment the policeman and Sergey Nikanoritch came in again to see
      Matvey. Yakov Ivanitch thought that these people, too, had no religion,
      and that that did not trouble them in the least; and human life began to
      seem to him as strange, senseless and unenlightened as a dog’s.
      Bareheaded he walked about the yard, then he went out on to the road,
      clenching his fists. Snow was falling in big flakes at the time. His beard
      was blown about in the wind. He kept shaking his head, as though there
      were something weighing upon his head and shoulders, as though devils were
      sitting on them; and it seemed to him that it was not himself walking
      about, but some wild beast, a huge terrible beast, and that if he were to
      cry out his voice would be a roar that would sound all over the forest and
      the plain, and would frighten everyone. . . .
    

      V
    

      When he went back into the house the policeman was no longer there, but
      the waiter was sitting with Matvey, counting something on the reckoning
      beads. He was in the habit of coming often, almost every day, to the
      tavern; in old days he had come to see Yakov Ivanitch, now he came to see
      Matvey. He was continually reckoning on the beads, while his face
      perspired and looked strained, or he would ask for money or, stroking his
      whiskers, would describe how he had once been in a first-class station and
      used to prepare champagne-punch for officers, and at grand dinners served
      the sturgeon-soup with his own hands. Nothing in this world interested him
      but refreshment bars, and he could only talk about things to eat, about
      wines and the paraphernalia of the dinner-table. On one occasion, handing
      a cup of tea to a young woman who was nursing her baby and wishing to say
      something agreeable to her, he expressed himself in this way:
    

      “The mother’s breast is the baby’s refreshment bar.”
    

      Reckoning with the beads in Matvey’s room, he asked for money; said
      he could not go on living at Progonnaya, and several times repeated in a
      tone of voice that sounded as though he were just going to cry:
    

      “Where am I to go? Where am I to go now? Tell me that, please.”
    

      Then Matvey went into the kitchen and began peeling some boiled potatoes
      which he had probably put away from the day before. It was quiet, and it
      seemed to Yakov Ivanitch that the waiter was gone. It was past the time
      for evening service; he called Aglaia, and, thinking there was no one else
      in the house sang out aloud without embarrassment. He sang and read, but
      was inwardly pronouncing other words, “Lord, forgive me! Lord, save
      me!” and, one after another, without ceasing, he made low bows to
      the ground as though he wanted to exhaust himself, and he kept shaking his
      head, so that Aglaia looked at him with wonder. He was afraid Matvey would
      come in, and was certain that he would come in, and felt an anger against
      him which he could overcome neither by prayer nor by continually bowing
      down to the ground.
    

      Matvey opened the door very softly and went into the prayer-room.
    

      “It’s a sin, such a sin!” he said reproachfully, and
      heaved a sigh. “Repent! Think what you are doing, brother!”
    

      Yakov Ivanitch, clenching his fists and not looking at him for fear of
      striking him, went quickly out of the room. Feeling himself a huge
      terrible wild beast, just as he had done before on the road, he crossed
      the passage into the grey, dirty room, reeking with smoke and fog, in
      which the peasants usually drank tea, and there he spent a long time
      walking from one corner to the other, treading heavily, so that the
      crockery jingled on the shelves and the tables shook. It was clear to him
      now that he was himself dissatisfied with his religion, and could not pray
      as he used to do. He must repent, he must think things over, reconsider,
      live and pray in some other way. But how pray? And perhaps all this was a
      temptation of the devil, and nothing of this was necessary? . . . How was
      it to be? What was he to do? Who could guide him? What helplessness! He
      stopped and, clutching at his head, began to think, but Matvey’s
      being near him prevented him from reflecting calmly. And he went rapidly
      into the room.
    

      Matvey was sitting in the kitchen before a bowl of potato, eating. Close
      by, near the stove, Aglaia and Dashutka were sitting facing one another,
      spinning yarn. Between the stove and the table at which Matvey was sitting
      was stretched an ironing-board; on it stood a cold iron.
    

      “Sister,” Matvey asked, “let me have a little oil!”
    

      “Who eats oil on a day like this?” asked Aglaia.
    

      “I am not a monk, sister, but a layman. And in my weak health I may
      take not only oil but milk.”
    

      “Yes, at the factory you may have anything.”
    

      Aglaia took a bottle of Lenten oil from the shelf and banged it angrily
      down before Matvey, with a malignant smile evidently pleased that he was
      such a sinner.
    

      “But I tell you, you can’t eat oil!” shouted Yakov.
    

      Aglaia and Dashutka started, but Matvey poured the oil into the bowl and
      went on eating as though he had not heard.
    

      “I tell you, you can’t eat oil!” Yakov shouted still
      more loudly; he turned red all over, snatched up the bowl, lifted it
      higher than his head, and dashed it with all his force to the ground, so
      that it flew into fragments. “Don’t dare to speak!” he
      cried in a furious voice, though Matvey had not said a word. “Don’t
      dare!” he repeated, and struck his fist on the table.
    

      Matvey turned pale and got up.
    

      “Brother!” he said, still munching—“brother, think
      what you are about!”
    

      “Out of my house this minute!” shouted Yakov; he loathed
      Matvey’s wrinkled face, and his voice, and the crumbs on his
      moustache, and the fact that he was munching. “Out, I tell you!”
    

      “Brother, calm yourself! The pride of hell has confounded you!”
    

      “Hold your tongue!” (Yakov stamped.) “Go away, you
      devil!”
    

      “If you care to know,” Matvey went on in a loud voice, as he,
      too, began to get angry, “you are a backslider from God and a
      heretic. The accursed spirits have hidden the true light from you; your
      prayer is not acceptable to God. Repent before it is too late! The
      deathbed of the sinner is terrible! Repent, brother!”
    

      Yakov seized him by the shoulders and dragged him away from the table,
      while he turned whiter than ever, and frightened and bewildered, began
      muttering, “What is it? What’s the matter?” and,
      struggling and making efforts to free himself from Yakov’s hands, he
      accidentally caught hold of his shirt near the neck and tore the collar;
      and it seemed to Aglaia that he was trying to beat Yakov. She uttered a
      shriek, snatched up the bottle of Lenten oil and with all her force
      brought it down straight on the skull of the cousin she hated. Matvey
      reeled, and in one instant his face became calm and indifferent. Yakov,
      breathing heavily, excited, and feeling pleasure at the gurgle the bottle
      had made, like a living thing, when it had struck the head, kept him from
      falling and several times (he remembered this very distinctly) motioned
      Aglaia towards the iron with his finger; and only when the blood began
      trickling through his hands and he heard Dashutka’s loud wail, and
      when the ironing-board fell with a crash, and Matvey rolled heavily on it,
      Yakov left off feeling anger and understood what had happened.
    

      “Let him rot, the factory buck!” Aglaia brought out with
      repulsion, still keeping the iron in her hand. The white bloodstained
      kerchief slipped on to her shoulders and her grey hair fell in disorder.
      “He’s got what he deserved!”
    

      Everything was terrible. Dashutka sat on the floor near the stove with the
      yarn in her hands, sobbing, and continually bowing down, uttering at each
      bow a gasping sound. But nothing was so terrible to Yakov as the potato in
      the blood, on which he was afraid of stepping, and there was something
      else terrible which weighed upon him like a bad dream and seemed the worst
      danger, though he could not take it in for the first minute. This was the
      waiter, Sergey Nikanoritch, who was standing in the doorway with the
      reckoning beads in his hands, very pale, looking with horror at what was
      happening in the kitchen. Only when he turned and went quickly into the
      passage and from there outside, Yakov grasped who it was and followed him.
    

      Wiping his hands on the snow as he went, he reflected. The idea flashed
      through his mind that their labourer had gone away long before and had
      asked leave to stay the night at home in the village; the day before they
      had killed a pig, and there were huge bloodstains in the snow and on the
      sledge, and even one side of the top of the well was splattered with
      blood, so that it could not have seemed suspicious even if the whole of
      Yakov’s family had been stained with blood. To conceal the murder
      would be agonizing, but for the policeman, who would whistle and smile
      ironically, to come from the station, for the peasants to arrive and bind
      Yakov’s and Aglaia’s hands, and take them solemnly to the
      district courthouse and from there to the town, while everyone on the way
      would point at them and say mirthfully, “They are taking the
      Godlies!”—this seemed to Yakov more agonizing than anything,
      and he longed to lengthen out the time somehow, so as to endure this shame
      not now, but later, in the future.
    

      “I can lend you a thousand roubles, . . .” he said, overtaking
      Sergey Nikanoritch. “If you tell anyone, it will do no good. . . .
      There’s no bringing the man back, anyway;” and with difficulty
      keeping up with the waiter, who did not look round, but tried to walk away
      faster than ever, he went on: “I can give you fifteen hundred. . . .”
    

      He stopped because he was out of breath, while Sergey Nikanoritch walked
      on as quickly as ever, probably afraid that he would be killed, too. Only
      after passing the railway crossing and going half the way from the
      crossing to the station, he furtively looked round and walked more slowly.
      Lights, red and green, were already gleaming in the station and along the
      line; the wind had fallen, but flakes of snow were still coming down and
      the road had turned white again. But just at the station Sergey
      Nikanoritch stopped, thought a minute, and turned resolutely back. It was
      growing dark.
    

      “Oblige me with the fifteen hundred, Yakov Ivanitch,” he said,
      trembling all over. “I agree.”
    

      VI
    

      Yakov Ivanitch’s money was in the bank of the town and was invested
      in second mortgages; he only kept a little at home, Just what was wanted
      for necessary expenses. Going into the kitchen he felt for the matchbox,
      and while the sulphur was burning with a blue light he had time to make
      out the figure of Matvey, which was still lying on the floor near the
      table, but now it was covered with a white sheet, and nothing could be
      seen but his boots. A cricket was chirruping. Aglaia and Dashutka were not
      in the room, they were both sitting behind the counter in the tea-room,
      spinning yarn in silence. Yakov Ivanitch crossed to his own room with a
      little lamp in his hand, and pulled from under the bed a little box in
      which he kept his money. This time there were in it four hundred and
      twenty one-rouble notes and silver to the amount of thirty-five roubles;
      the notes had an unpleasant heavy smell. Putting the money together in his
      cap, Yakov Ivanitch went out into the yard and then out of the gate. He
      walked, looking from side to side, but there was no sign of the waiter.
    

      “Hi!” cried Yakov.
    

      A dark figure stepped out from the barrier at the railway crossing and
      came irresolutely towards him.
    

      “Why do you keep walking about?” said Yakov with vexation, as
      he recognized the waiter. “Here you are; there is a little less than
      five hundred. . . . I’ve no more in the house.”
    

      “Very well; . . . very grateful to you,” muttered Sergey
      Nikanoritch, taking the money greedily and stuffing it into his pockets.
      He was trembling all over, and that was perceptible in spite of the
      darkness. “Don’t worry yourself, Yakov Ivanitch. . . . What
      should I chatter for: I came and went away, that’s all I’ve
      had to do with it. As the saying is, I know nothing and I can tell nothing
      . . .” And at once he added with a sigh “Cursed life!”
    

      For a minute they stood in silence, without looking at each other.
    

      “So it all came from a trifle, goodness knows how, . . .” said
      the waiter, trembling. “I was sitting counting to myself when all at
      once a noise. . . . I looked through the door, and just on account of
      Lenten oil you. . . . Where is he now?”
    

      “Lying there in the kitchen.”
    

      “You ought to take him somewhere. . . . Why put it off?”
    

      Yakov accompanied him to the station without a word, then went home again
      and harnessed the horse to take Matvey to Limarovo. He had decided to take
      him to the forest of Limarovo, and to leave him there on the road, and
      then he would tell everyone that Matvey had gone off to Vedenyapino and
      had not come back, and then everyone would think that he had been killed
      by someone on the road. He knew there was no deceiving anyone by this, but
      to move, to do something, to be active, was not as agonizing as to sit
      still and wait. He called Dashutka, and with her carried Matvey out.
      Aglaia stayed behind to clean up the kitchen.
    

      When Yakov and Dashutka turned back they were detained at the railway
      crossing by the barrier being let down. A long goods train was passing,
      dragged by two engines, breathing heavily, and flinging puffs of crimson
      fire out of their funnels.
    

      The foremost engine uttered a piercing whistle at the crossing in sight of
      the station.
    

      “It’s whistling, . . .” said Dashutka.
    

      The train had passed at last, and the signalman lifted the barrier without
      haste.
    

      “Is that you, Yakov Ivanitch? I didn’t know you, so you’ll
      be rich.”
    

      And then when they had reached home they had to go to bed.
    

      Aglaia and Dashutka made themselves a bed in the tea-room and lay down
      side by side, while Yakov stretched himself on the counter. They neither
      said their prayers nor lighted the ikon lamp before lying down to sleep.
      All three lay awake till morning, but did not utter a single word, and it
      seemed to them that all night someone was walking about in the empty
      storey overhead.
    

      Two days later a police inspector and the examining magistrate came from
      the town and made a search, first in Matvey’s room and then in the
      whole tavern. They questioned Yakov first of all, and he testified that on
      the Monday Matvey had gone to Vedenyapino to confess, and that he must
      have been killed by the sawyers who were working on the line.
    

      And when the examining magistrate had asked him how it had happened that
      Matvey was found on the road, while his cap had turned up at home—surely
      he had not gone to Vedenyapino without his cap?— and why they had
      not found a single drop of blood beside him in the snow on the road,
      though his head was smashed in and his face and chest were black with
      blood, Yakov was confused, lost his head and answered:
    

      “I cannot tell.”
    

      And just what Yakov had so feared happened: the policeman came, the
      district police officer smoked in the prayer-room and Aglaia fell upon him
      with abuse and was rude to the police inspector; and afterwards when Yakov
      and Aglaia were led out to the yard, the peasants crowded at the gates and
      said, “They are taking the Godlies!” and it seemed that they
      were all glad.
    

      At the inquiry the policeman stated positively that Yakov and Aglaia had
      killed Matvey in order not to share with him, and that Matvey had money of
      his own, and that if it was not found at the search evidently Yakov and
      Aglaia had got hold of it. And Dashutka was questioned. She said that
      Uncle Matvey and Aunt Aglaia quarrelled and almost fought every day over
      money, and that Uncle Matvey was rich, so much so that he had given
      someone—“his Darling”—nine hundred roubles.
    

      Dashutka was left alone in the tavern. No one came now to drink tea or
      vodka, and she divided her time between cleaning up the rooms, drinking
      mead and eating rolls; but a few days later they questioned the signalman
      at the railway crossing, and he said that late on Monday evening he had
      seen Yakov and Dashutka driving from Limarovo. Dashutka, too, was
      arrested, taken to the town and put in prison. It soon became known, from
      what Aglaia said, that Sergey Nikanoritch had been present at the murder.
      A search was made in his room, and money was found in an unusual place, in
      his snowboots under the stove, and the money was all in small change,
      three hundred one-rouble notes. He swore he had made this money himself,
      and that he hadn’t been in the tavern for a year, but witnesses
      testified that he was poor and had been in great want of money of late,
      and that he used to go every day to the tavern to borrow from Matvey; and
      the policeman described how on the day of the murder he had himself gone
      twice to the tavern with the waiter to help him to borrow. It was recalled
      at this juncture that on Monday evening Sergey Nikanoritch had not been
      there to meet the passenger train, but had gone off somewhere. And he,
      too, was arrested and taken to the town.
    

      The trial took place eleven months later.
    

      Yakov Ivanitch looked much older and much thinner, and spoke in a low
      voice like a sick man. He felt weak, pitiful, lower in stature that anyone
      else, and it seemed as though his soul, too, like his body, had grown
      older and wasted, from the pangs of his conscience and from the dreams and
      imaginings which never left him all the while he was in prison. When it
      came out that he did not go to church the president of the court asked
      him:
    

      “Are you a dissenter?”
    

      “I can’t tell,” he answered.
    

      He had no religion at all now; he knew nothing and understood nothing; and
      his old belief was hateful to him now, and seemed to him darkness and
      folly. Aglaia was not in the least subdued, and she still went on abusing
      the dead man, blaming him for all their misfortunes. Sergey Nikanoritch
      had grown a beard instead of whiskers. At the trial he was red and
      perspiring, and was evidently ashamed of his grey prison coat and of
      sitting on the same bench with humble peasants. He defended himself
      awkwardly, and, trying to prove that he had not been to the tavern for a
      whole year, got into an altercation with every witness, and the spectators
      laughed at him. Dashutka had grown fat in prison. At the trial she did not
      understand the questions put to her, and only said that when they killed
      Uncle Matvey she was dreadfully frightened, but afterwards she did not
      mind.
    

      All four were found guilty of murder with mercenary motives. Yakov
      Ivanitch was sentenced to penal servitude for twenty years; Aglaia for
      thirteen and a half; Sergey Nikanoritch to ten; Dashutka to six.
    

      VII
    

      Late one evening a foreign steamer stopped in the roads of DuÃ© in Sahalin
      and asked for coal. The captain was asked to wait till morning, but he did
      not want to wait over an hour, saying that if the weather changed for the
      worse in the night there would be a risk of his having to go off without
      coal. In the Gulf of Tartary the weather is liable to violent changes in
      the course of half an hour, and then the shores of Sahalin are dangerous.
      And already it had turned fresh, and there was a considerable sea running.
    

      A gang of convicts were sent to the mine from the Voevodsky prison, the
      grimmest and most forbidding of all the prisons in Sahalin. The coal had
      to be loaded upon barges, and then they had to be towed by a steam-cutter
      alongside the steamer which was anchored more than a quarter of a mile
      from the coast, and then the unloading and reloading had to begin—an
      exhausting task when the barge kept rocking against the steamer and the
      men could scarcely keep on their legs for sea-sickness. The convicts, only
      just roused from their sleep, still drowsy, went along the shore,
      stumbling in the darkness and clanking their fetters. On the left,
      scarcely visible, was a tall, steep, extremely gloomy-looking cliff, while
      on the right there was a thick impenetrable mist, in which the sea moaned
      with a prolonged monotonous sound, “Ah! . . . ah! . . . ah! . . .
      ah! . . .” And it was only when the overseer was lighting his pipe,
      casting as he did so a passing ray of light on the escort with a gun and
      on the coarse faces of two or three of the nearest convicts, or when he
      went with his lantern close to the water that the white crests of the
      foremost waves could be discerned.
    

      One of this gang was Yakov Ivanitch, nicknamed among the convicts the
      “Brush,” on account of his long beard. No one had addressed
      him by his name or his father’s name for a long time now; they
      called him simply Yashka.
    

      He was here in disgrace, as, three months after coming to Siberia, feeling
      an intense irresistible longing for home, he had succumbed to temptation
      and run away; he had soon been caught, had been sentenced to penal
      servitude for life and given forty lashes. Then he was punished by
      flogging twice again for losing his prison clothes, though on each
      occasion they were stolen from him. The longing for home had begun from
      the very time he had been brought to Odessa, and the convict train had
      stopped in the night at Progonnaya; and Yakov, pressing to the window, had
      tried to see his own home, and could see nothing in the darkness. He had
      no one with whom to talk of home. His sister Aglaia had been sent right
      across Siberia, and he did not know where she was now. Dashutka was in
      Sahalin, but she had been sent to live with some ex-convict in a far away
      settlement; there was no news of her except that once a settler who had
      come to the Voevodsky Prison told Yakov that Dashutka had three children.
      Sergey Nikanoritch was serving as a footman at a government official’s
      at DuÃ©, but he could not reckon on ever seeing him, as he was ashamed of
      being acquainted with convicts of the peasant class.
    

      The gang reached the mine, and the men took their places on the quay. It
      was said there would not be any loading, as the weather kept getting worse
      and the steamer was meaning to set off. They could see three lights. One
      of them was moving: that was the steam-cutter going to the steamer, and it
      seemed to be coming back to tell them whether the work was to be done or
      not. Shivering with the autumn cold and the damp sea mist, wrapping
      himself in his short torn coat, Yakov Ivanitch looked intently without
      bElinking in the direction in which lay his home. Ever since he had lived
      in prison together with men banished here from all ends of the earth—with
      Russians, Ukrainians, Tatars, Georgians, Chinese, Gypsies, Jews— and
      ever since he had listened to their talk and watched their sufferings, he
      had begun to turn again to God, and it seemed to him at last that he had
      learned the true faith for which all his family, from his grandmother
      Avdotya down, had so thirsted, which they had sought so long and which
      they had never found. He knew it all now and understood where God was, and
      how He was to be served, and the only thing he could not understand was
      why men’s destinies were so diverse, why this simple faith which
      other men receive from God for nothing and together with their lives, had
      cost him such a price that his arms and legs trembled like a drunken man’s
      from all the horrors and agonies which as far as he could see would go on
      without a break to the day of his death. He looked with strained eyes into
      the darkness, and it seemed to him that through the thousand miles of that
      mist he could see home, could see his native province, his district,
      Progonnaya, could see the darkness, the savagery, the heartlessness, and
      the dull, sullen, animal indifference of the men he had left there. His
      eyes were dimmed with tears; but still he gazed into the distance where
      the pale lights of the steamer faintly gleamed, and his heart ached with
      yearning for home, and he longed to live, to go back home to tell them
      there of his new faith and to save from ruin if only one man, and to live
      without suffering if only for one day.
    

      The cutter arrived, and the overseer announced in a loud voice that there
      would be no loading.
    

      “Back!” he commanded. “Steady!”
    

      They could hear the hoisting of the anchor chain on the steamer. A strong
      piercing wind was blowing by now; somewhere on the steep cliff overhead
      the trees were creaking. Most likely a storm was coming.
    











      UPROOTED
    

An Incident of My Travels


I WAS on my way
      back from evening service. The clock in the belfry of the Svyatogorsky
      Monastery pealed out its soft melodious chimes by way of prelude and then
      struck twelve. The great courtyard of the monastery stretched out at the
      foot of the Holy Mountains on the banks of the Donets, and, enclosed by
      the high hostel buildings as by a wall, seemed now in the night, when it
      was lighted up only by dim lanterns, lights in the windows, and the stars,
      a living hotch-potch full of movement, sound, and the most original
      confusion. From end to end, so far as the eye could see, it was all choked
      up with carts, old-fashioned coaches and chaises, vans, tilt-carts, about
      which stood crowds of horses, dark and white, and horned oxen, while
      people bustled about, and black long-skirted lay brothers threaded their
      way in and out in all directions. Shadows and streaks of light cast from
      the windows moved over the carts and the heads of men and horses, and in
      the dense twilight this all assumed the most monstrous capricious shapes:
      here the tilted shafts stretched upwards to the sky, here eyes of fire
      appeared in the face of a horse, there a lay brother grew a pair of black
      wings. . . . There was the noise of talk, the snorting and munching of
      horses, the creaking of carts, the whimpering of children. Fresh crowds
      kept walking in at the gate and belated carts drove up.
    

      The pines which were piled up on the overhanging mountain, one above
      another, and leaned towards the roof of the hostel, gazed into the
      courtyard as into a deep pit, and listened in wonder; in their dark
      thicket the cuckoos and nightingales never ceased calling. . . . Looking
      at the confusion, listening to the uproar, one fancied that in this living
      hotch-potch no one understood anyone, that everyone was looking for
      something and would not find it, and that this multitude of carts, chaises
      and human beings could not ever succeed in getting off.
    

      More than ten thousand people flocked to the Holy Mountains for the
      festivals of St. John the Divine and St. Nikolay the wonder-worker. Not
      only the hostel buildings, but even the bakehouse, the tailoring room, the
      carpenter’s shop, the carriage house, were filled to overflowing. .
      . . Those who had arrived towards night clustered like flies in autumn, by
      the walls, round the wells in the yard, or in the narrow passages of the
      hostel, waiting to be shown a resting-place for the night. The lay
      brothers, young and old, were in an incessant movement, with no rest or
      hope of being relieved. By day or late at night they produced the same
      impression of men hastening somewhere and agitated by something, yet, in
      spite of their extreme exhaustion, their faces remained full of courage
      and kindly welcome, their voices friendly, their movements rapid. . . .
      For everyone who came they had to find a place to sleep, and to provide
      food and drink; to those who were deaf, slow to understand, or profuse in
      questions, they had to give long and wearisome explanations, to tell them
      why there were no empty rooms, at what o’clock the service was to be
      where holy bread was sold, and so on. They had to run, to carry, to talk
      incessantly, but more than that, they had to be polite, too, to be
      tactful, to try to arrange that the Greeks from Mariupol, accustomed to
      live more comfortably than the Little Russians, should be put with other
      Greeks, that some shopkeeper from Bahmut or Lisitchansk, dressed like a
      lady, should not be offended by being put with peasants. There were
      continual cries of: “Father, kindly give us some kvass! Kindly give
      us some hay!” or “Father, may I drink water after confession?”
      And the lay brother would have to give out kvass or hay or to answer:
      “Address yourself to the priest, my good woman, we have not the
      authority to give permission.” Another question would follow,
      “Where is the priest then?” and the lay brother would have to
      explain where was the priest’s cell. With all this bustling
      activity, he yet had to make time to go to service in the church, to serve
      in the part devoted to the gentry, and to give full answers to the mass of
      necessary and unnecessary questions which pilgrims of the educated class
      are fond of showering about them. Watching them during the course of
      twenty-four hours, I found it hard to imagine when these black moving
      figures sat down and when they slept.
    

      When, coming back from the evening service, I went to the hostel in which
      a place had been assigned me, the monk in charge of the sleeping quarters
      was standing in the doorway, and beside him, on the steps, was a group of
      several men and women dressed like townsfolk.
    

      “Sir,” said the monk, stopping me, “will you be so good
      as to allow this young man to pass the night in your room? If you would do
      us the favour! There are so many people and no place left—it is
      really dreadful!”
    

      And he indicated a short figure in a light overcoat and a straw hat. I
      consented, and my chance companion followed me. Unlocking the little
      padlock on my door, I was always, whether I wanted to or not, obliged to
      look at the picture that hung on the doorpost on a level with my face.
      This picture with the title, “A Meditation on Death,” depicted
      a monk on his knees, gazing at a coffin and at a skeleton laying in it.
      Behind the man’s back stood another skeleton, somewhat more solid
      and carrying a scythe.
    

      “There are no bones like that,” said my companion, pointing to
      the place in the skeleton where there ought to have been a pelvis. “Speaking
      generally, you know, the spiritual fare provided for the people is not of
      the first quality,” he added, and heaved through his nose a long and
      very melancholy sigh, meant to show me that I had to do with a man who
      really knew something about spiritual fare.
    

      While I was looking for the matches to light a candle he sighed once more
      and said:
    

      “When I was in Harkov I went several times to the anatomy theatre
      and saw the bones there; I have even been in the mortuary. Am I not in
      your way?”
    

      My room was small and poky, with neither table nor chairs in it, but quite
      filled up with a chest of drawers by the window, the stove and two little
      wooden sofas which stood against the walls, facing one another, leaving a
      narrow space to walk between them. Thin rusty-looking little mattresses
      lay on the little sofas, as well as my belongings. There were two sofas,
      so this room was evidently intended for two, and I pointed out the fact to
      my companion.
    

      “They will soon be ringing for mass, though,” he said, “and
      I shan’t have to be in your way very long.”
    

      Still under the impression that he was in my way and feeling awkward, he
      moved with a guilty step to his little sofa, sighed guiltily and sat down.
      When the tallow candle with its dim, dilatory flame had left off
      flickering and burned up sufficiently to make us both visible, I could
      make out what he was like. He was a young man of two-and-twenty, with a
      round and pleasing face, dark childlike eyes, dressed like a townsman in
      grey cheap clothes, and as one could judge from his complexion and narrow
      shoulders, not used to manual labour. He was of a very indefinite type;
      one could take him neither for a student nor for a man in trade, still
      less for a workman. But looking at his attractive face and childlike
      friendly eyes, I was unwilling to believe he was one of those vagabond
      impostors with whom every conventual establishment where they give food
      and lodging is flooded, and who give themselves out as divinity students,
      expelled for standing up for justice, or for church singers who have lost
      their voice. . . . There was something characteristic, typical, very
      familiar in his face, but what exactly, I could not remember nor make out.
    

      For a long time he sat silent, pondering. Probably because I had not shown
      appreciation of his remarks about bones and the mortuary, he thought that
      I was ill-humoured and displeased at his presence. Pulling a sausage out
      of his pocket, he turned it about before his eyes and said irresolutely:
    

      “Excuse my troubling you, . . . have you a knife?”
    

      I gave him a knife.
    

      “The sausage is disgusting,” he said, frowning and cutting
      himself off a little bit. “In the shop here they sell you rubbish
      and fleece you horribly. . . . I would offer you a piece, but you would
      scarcely care to consume it. Will you have some?”
    

      In his language, too, there was something typical that had a very great
      deal in common with what was characteristic in his face, but what it was
      exactly I still could not decide. To inspire confidence and to show that I
      was not ill-humoured, I took some of the proffered sausage. It certainly
      was horrible; one needed the teeth of a good house-dog to deal with it. As
      we worked our jaws we got into conversation; we began complaining to each
      other of the lengthiness of the service.
    

      “The rule here approaches that of Mount Athos,” I said;
      “but at Athos the night services last ten hours, and on great
      feast-days —fourteen! You should go there for prayers!”
    

      “Yes,” answered my companion, and he wagged his head, “I
      have been here for three weeks. And you know, every day services, every
      day services. On ordinary days at midnight they ring for matins, at five o’clock
      for early mass, at nine o’clock for late mass. Sleep is utterly out
      of the question. In the daytime there are hymns of praise, special
      prayers, vespers. . . . And when I was preparing for the sacrament I was
      simply dropping from exhaustion.” He sighed and went on: “And
      it’s awkward not to go to church. . . . The monks give one a room,
      feed one, and, you know, one is ashamed not to go. One wouldn’t mind
      standing it for a day or two, perhaps, but three weeks is too much—much
      too much! Are you here for long?”
    

      “I am going to-morrow evening.”
    

      “But I am staying another fortnight.”
    

      “But I thought it was not the rule to stay for so long here?”
      I said.
    

      “Yes, that’s true: if anyone stays too long, sponging on the
      monks, he is asked to go. Judge for yourself, if the proletariat were
      allowed to stay on here as long as they liked there would never be a room
      vacant, and they would eat up the whole monastery. That’s true. But
      the monks make an exception for me, and I hope they won’t turn me
      out for some time. You know I am a convert.”
    

      “You mean?”
    

      “I am a Jew baptized. . . . Only lately I have embraced orthodoxy.”
    

      Now I understood what I had before been utterly unable to understand from
      his face: his thick lips, and his way of twitching up the right corner of
      his mouth and his right eyebrow, when he was talking, and that peculiar
      oily brilliance of his eyes which is only found in Jews. I understood,
      too, his phraseology. . . . From further conversation I learned that his
      name was Alexandr Ivanitch, and had in the past been Isaac, that he was a
      native of the Mogilev province, and that he had come to the Holy Mountains
      from Novotcherkassk, where he had adopted the orthodox faith.
    

      Having finished his sausage, Alexandr Ivanitch got up, and, raising his
      right eyebrow, said his prayer before the ikon. The eyebrow remained up
      when he sat down again on the little sofa and began giving me a brief
      account of his long biography.
    

      “From early childhood I cherished a love for learning,” he
      began in a tone which suggested he was not speaking of himself, but of
      some great man of the past. “My parents were poor Hebrews; they
      exist by buying and selling in a small way; they live like beggars, you
      know, in filth. In fact, all the people there are poor and superstitious;
      they don’t like education, because education, very naturally, turns
      a man away from religion. . . . They are fearful fanatics. . . . Nothing
      would induce my parents to let me be educated, and they wanted me to take
      to trade, too, and to know nothing but the Talmud. . . . But you will
      agree, it is not everyone who can spend his whole life struggling for a
      crust of bread, wallowing in filth, and mumbling the Talmud. At times
      officers and country gentlemen would put up at papa’s inn, and they
      used to talk a great deal of things which in those days I had never
      dreamed of; and, of course, it was alluring and moved me to envy. I used
      to cry and entreat them to send me to school, but they taught me to read
      Hebrew and nothing more. Once I found a Russian newspaper, and took it
      home with me to make a kite of it. I was beaten for it, though I couldn’t
      read Russian. Of course, fanaticism is inevitable, for every people
      instinctively strives to preserve its nationality, but I did not know that
      then and was very indignant. . . .”
    

      Having made such an intellectual observation, Isaac, as he had been,
      raised his right eyebrow higher than ever in his satisfaction and looked
      at me, as it were, sideways, like a cock at a grain of corn, with an air
      as though he would say: “Now at last you see for certain that I am
      an intellectual man, don’t you?” After saying something more
      about fanaticism and his irresistible yearning for enlightenment, he went
      on:
    

      “What could I do? I ran away to Smolensk. And there I had a cousin
      who relined saucepans and made tins. Of course, I was glad to work under
      him, as I had nothing to live upon; I was barefoot and in rags. . . . I
      thought I could work by day and study at night and on Saturdays. And so I
      did, but the police found out I had no passport and sent me back by stages
      to my father. . . .”
    

      Alexandr Ivanitch shrugged one shoulder and sighed.
    

      “What was one to do?” he went on, and the more vividly the
      past rose up before his mind, the more marked his Jewish accent became.
      “My parents punished me and handed me over to my grandfather, a
      fanatical old Jew, to be reformed. But I went off at night to Shklov. And
      when my uncle tried to catch me in Shklov, I went off to Mogilev; there I
      stayed two days and then I went off to Starodub with a comrade.”
    

      Later on he mentioned in his story Gonel, Kiev, Byelaya, Tserkov, Uman,
      Balt, Bendery and at last reached Odessa.
    

      “In Odessa I wandered about for a whole week, out of work and
      hungry, till I was taken in by some Jews who went about the town buying
      second-hand clothes. I knew how to read and write by then, and had done
      arithmetic up to fractions, and I wanted to go to study somewhere, but I
      had not the means. What was I to do? For six months I went about Odessa
      buying old clothes, but the Jews paid me no wages, the rascals. I resented
      it and left them. Then I went by steamer to Perekop.”
    

      “What for?”
    

      “Oh, nothing. A Greek promised me a job there. In short, till I was
      sixteen I wandered about like that with no definite work and no roots till
      I got to Poltava. There a student, a Jew, found out that I wanted to
      study, and gave me a letter to the Harkov students. Of course, I went to
      Harkov. The students consulted together and began to prepare me for the
      technical school. And, you know, I must say the students that I met there
      were such that I shall never forget them to the day of my death. To say
      nothing of their giving me food and lodging, they set me on the right
      path, they made me think, showed me the object of life. Among them were
      intellectual remarkable people who by now are celebrated. For instance,
      you have heard of Grumaher, haven’t you?”
    

      “No, I haven’t.”
    

      “You haven’t! He wrote very clever articles in the Harkov
      Gazette, and was preparing to be a professor. Well, I read a great
      deal and attended the student’s societies, where you hear nothing
      that is commonplace. I was working up for six months, but as one has to
      have been through the whole high-school course of mathematics to enter the
      technical school, Grumaher advised me to try for the veterinary institute,
      where they admit high-school boys from the sixth form. Of course, I began
      working for it. I did not want to be a veterinary surgeon but they told me
      that after finishing the course at the veterinary institute I should be
      admitted to the faculty of medicine without examination. I learnt all
      KÃ¼hner; I could read Cornelius Nepos, Ã  livre ouvert; and in Greek
      I read through almost all Curtius. But, you know, one thing and another, .
      . . the students leaving and the uncertainty of my position, and then I
      heard that my mamma had come and was looking for me all over Harkov. Then
      I went away. What was I to do? But luckily I learned that there was a
      school of mines here on the Donets line. Why should I not enter that? You
      know the school of mines qualifies one as a mining foreman—a
      splendid berth. I know of mines where the foremen get a salary of fifteen
      hundred a year. Capital. . . . I entered it. . . .”
    

      With an expression of reverent awe on his face Alexandr Ivanitch
      enumerated some two dozen abstruse sciences in which instruction was given
      at the school of mines; he described the school itself, the construction
      of the shafts, and the condition of the miners. . . . Then he told me a
      terrible story which sounded like an invention, though I could not help
      believing it, for his tone in telling it was too genuine and the
      expression of horror on his Semitic face was too evidently sincere.
    

      “While I was doing the practical work, I had such an accident one
      day!” he said, raising both eyebrows. “I was at a mine here in
      the Donets district. You have seen, I dare say, how people are let down
      into the mine. You remember when they start the horse and set the gates
      moving one bucket on the pulley goes down into the mine, while the other
      comes up; when the first begins to come up, then the second goes down—exactly
      like a well with two pails. Well, one day I got into the bucket, began
      going down, and can you fancy, all at once I heard, Trrr! The chain had
      broken and I flew to the devil together with the bucket and the broken bit
      of chain. . . . I fell from a height of twenty feet, flat on my chest and
      stomach, while the bucket, being heavier, reached the bottom before me,
      and I hit this shoulder here against its edge. I lay, you know, stunned. I
      thought I was killed, and all at once I saw a fresh calamity: the other
      bucket, which was going up, having lost the counter-balancing weight, was
      coming down with a crash straight upon me. . . . What was I to do? Seeing
      the position, I squeezed closer to the wall, crouching and waiting for the
      bucket to come full crush next minute on my head. I thought of papa and
      mamma and Mogilev and Grumaher. . . . I prayed. . . . But happily . . . it
      frightens me even to think of it. . . .”
    

      Alexandr Ivanitch gave a constrained smile and rubbed his forehead with
      his hand.
    

      “But happily it fell beside me and only caught this side a little. .
      . . It tore off coat, shirt and skin, you know, from this side. . . . The
      force of it was terrific. I was unconscious after it. They got me out and
      sent me to the hospital. I was there four months, and the doctors there
      said I should go into consumption. I always have a cough now and a pain in
      my chest. And my psychic condition is terrible. . . . When I am alone in a
      room I feel overcome with terror. Of course, with my health in that state,
      to be a mining foreman is out of the question. I had to give up the school
      of mines. . . .”
    

      “And what are you doing now?” I asked.
    

      “I have passed my examination as a village schoolmaster. Now I
      belong to the orthodox church, and I have a right to be a teacher. In
      Novotcherkassk, where I was baptized, they took a great interest in me and
      promised me a place in a church parish school. I am going there in a
      fortnight, and shall ask again.”
    

      Alexandr Ivanitch took off his overcoat and remained in a shirt with an
      embroidered Russian collar and a worsted belt.
    

      “It is time for bed,” he said, folding his overcoat for a
      pillow, and yawning. “Till lately, you know, I had no knowledge of
      God at all. I was an atheist. When I was lying in the hospital I thought
      of religion, and began reflecting on that subject. In my opinion, there is
      only one religion possible for a thinking man, and that is the Christian
      religion. If you don’t believe in Christ, then there is nothing else
      to believe in, . . . is there? Judaism has outlived its day, and is
      preserved only owing to the peculiarities of the Jewish race. When
      civilization reaches the Jews there will not be a trace of Judaism left.
      All young Jews are atheists now, observe. The New Testament is the natural
      continuation of the Old, isn’t it?”
    

      I began trying to find out the reasons which had led him to take so grave
      and bold a step as the change of religion, but he kept repeating the same,
      “The New Testament is the natural continuation of the Old”—a
      formula obviously not his own, but acquired— which did not explain
      the question in the least. In spite of my efforts and artifices, the
      reasons remained obscure. If one could believe that he had embraced
      Orthodoxy from conviction, as he said he had done, what was the nature and
      foundation of this conviction it was impossible to grasp from his words.
      It was equally impossible to assume that he had changed his religion from
      interested motives: his cheap shabby clothes, his going on living at the
      expense of the convent, and the uncertainty of his future, did not look
      like interested motives. There was nothing for it but to accept the idea
      that my companion had been impelled to change his religion by the same
      restless spirit which had flung him like a chip of wood from town to town,
      and which he, using the generally accepted formula, called the craving for
      enlightenment.
    

      Before going to bed I went into the corridor to get a drink of water. When
      I came back my companion was standing in the middle of the room, and he
      looked at me with a scared expression. His face looked a greyish white,
      and there were drops of perspiration on his forehead.
    

      “My nerves are in an awful state,” he muttered with a sickly
      smile,” awful! It’s acute psychological disturbance. But that’s
      of no consequence.”
    

      And he began reasoning again that the New Testament was a natural
      continuation of the Old, that Judaism has outlived its day. . . . Picking
      out his phrases, he seemed to be trying to put together the forces of his
      conviction and to smother with them the uneasiness of his soul, and to
      prove to himself that in giving up the religion of his fathers he had done
      nothing dreadful or peculiar, but had acted as a thinking man free from
      prejudice, and that therefore he could boldly remain in a room all alone
      with his conscience. He was trying to convince himself, and with his eyes
      besought my assistance.
    

      Meanwhile a big clumsy wick had burned up on our tallow candle. It was by
      now getting light. At the gloomy little window, which was turning blue, we
      could distinctly see both banks of the Donets River and the oak copse
      beyond the river. It was time to sleep.
    

      “It will be very interesting here to-morrow,” said my
      companion when I put out the candle and went to bed. “After early
      mass, the procession will go in boats from the Monastery to the Hermitage.”
    

      Raising his right eyebrow and putting his head on one side, he prayed
      before the ikons, and, without undressing, lay down on his little sofa.
    

      “Yes,” he said, turning over on the other side.
    

      “Why yes?” I asked.
    

      “When I accepted orthodoxy in Novotcherkassk my mother was looking
      for me in Rostov. She felt that I meant to change my religion,” he
      sighed, and went on: “It is six years since I was there in the
      province of Mogilev. My sister must be married by now.”
    

      After a short silence, seeing that I was still awake, he began talking
      quietly of how they soon, thank God, would give him a job, and that at
      last he would have a home of his own, a settled position, his daily bread
      secure. . . . And I was thinking that this man would never have a home of
      his own, nor a settled position, nor his daily bread secure. He dreamed
      aloud of a village school as of the Promised Land; like the majority of
      people, he had a prejudice against a wandering life, and regarded it as
      something exceptional, abnormal and accidental, like an illness, and was
      looking for salvation in ordinary workaday life. The tone of his voice
      betrayed that he was conscious of his abnormal position and regretted it.
      He seemed as it were apologizing and justifying himself.
    

      Not more than a yard from me lay a homeless wanderer; in the rooms of the
      hostels and by the carts in the courtyard among the pilgrims some hundreds
      of such homeless wanderers were waiting for the morning, and further away,
      if one could picture to oneself the whole of Russia, a vast multitude of
      such uprooted creatures was pacing at that moment along highroads and
      side-tracks, seeking something better, or were waiting for the dawn,
      asleep in wayside inns and little taverns, or on the grass under the open
      sky. . . . As I fell asleep I imagined how amazed and perhaps even
      overjoyed all these people would have been if reasoning and words could be
      found to prove to them that their life was as little in need of
      justification as any other. In my sleep I heard a bell ring outside as
      plaintively as though shedding bitter tears, and the lay brother calling
      out several times:
    

      “Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy upon us! Come to mass!”
    

      When I woke up my companion was not in the room. It was sunny and there
      was a murmur of the crowds through the window. Going out, I learned that
      mass was over and that the procession had set off for the Hermitage some
      time before. The people were wandering in crowds upon the river bank and,
      feeling at liberty, did not know what to do with themselves: they could
      not eat or drink, as the late mass was not yet over at the Hermitage; the
      Monastery shops where pilgrims are so fond of crowding and asking prices
      were still shut. In spite of their exhaustion, many of them from sheer
      boredom were trudging to the Hermitage. The path from the Monastery to the
      Hermitage, towards which I directed my steps, twined like a snake along
      the high steep bank, going up and down and threading in and out among the
      oaks and pines. Below, the Donets gleamed, reflecting the sun; above, the
      rugged chalk cliff stood up white with bright green on the top from the
      young foliage of oaks and pines, which, hanging one above another, managed
      somehow to grow on the vertical cliff without falling. The pilgrims
      trailed along the path in single file, one behind another. The majority of
      them were Little Russians from the neighbouring districts, but there were
      many from a distance, too, who had come on foot from the provinces of
      Kursk and Orel; in the long string of varied colours there were Greek
      settlers, too, from Mariupol, strongly built, sedate and friendly people,
      utterly unlike their weakly and degenerate compatriots who fill our
      southern seaside towns. There were men from the Donets, too, with red
      stripes on their breeches, and emigrants from the Tavritchesky province.
      There were a good many pilgrims of a nondescript class, like my Alexandr
      Ivanitch; what sort of people they were and where they came from it was
      impossible to tell from their faces, from their clothes, or from their
      speech. The path ended at the little landing-stage, from which a narrow
      road went to the left to the Hermitage, cutting its way through the
      mountain. At the landing-stage stood two heavy big boats of a forbidding
      aspect, like the New Zealand pirogues which one may see in the works of
      Jules Verne. One boat with rugs on the seats was destined for the clergy
      and the singers, the other without rugs for the public. When the
      procession was returning I found myself among the elect who had succeeded
      in squeezing themselves into the second. There were so many of the elect
      that the boat scarcely moved, and one had to stand all the way without
      stirring and to be careful that one’s hat was not crushed. The route
      was lovely. Both banks—one high, steep and white, with overhanging
      pines and oaks, with the crowds hurrying back along the path, and the
      other shelving, with green meadows and an oak copse bathed in sunshine—looked
      as happy and rapturous as though the May morning owed its charm only to
      them. The reflection of the sun in the rapidly flowing Donets quivered and
      raced away in all directions, and its long rays played on the chasubles,
      on the banners and on the drops splashed up by the oars. The singing of
      the Easter hymns, the ringing of the bells, the splash of the oars in the
      water, the calls of the birds, all mingled in the air into something
      tender and harmonious. The boat with the priests and the banners led the
      way; at its helm the black figure of a lay brother stood motionless as a
      statue.
    

      When the procession was getting near the Monastery, I noticed Alexandr
      Ivanitch among the elect. He was standing in front of them all, and, his
      mouth wide open with pleasure and his right eyebrow cocked up, was gazing
      at the procession. His face was beaming; probably at such moments, when
      there were so many people round him and it was so bright, he was satisfied
      with himself, his new religion, and his conscience.
    

      When a little later we were sitting in our room, drinking tea, he still
      beamed with satisfaction; his face showed that he was satisfied both with
      the tea and with me, that he fully appreciated my being an intellectual,
      but that he would know how to play his part with credit if any
      intellectual topic turned up. . . .
    

      “Tell me, what psychology ought I to read?” he began an
      intellectual conversation, wrinkling up his nose.
    

      “Why, what do you want it for?”
    

      “One cannot be a teacher without a knowledge of psychology. Before
      teaching a boy I ought to understand his soul.”
    

      I told him that psychology alone would not be enough to make one
      understand a boy’s soul, and moreover psychology for a teacher who
      had not yet mastered the technical methods of instruction in reading,
      writing, and arithmetic would be a luxury as superfluous as the higher
      mathematics. He readily agreed with me, and began describing how hard and
      responsible was the task of a teacher, how hard it was to eradicate in the
      boy the habitual tendency to evil and superstition, to make him think
      honestly and independently, to instil into him true religion, the ideas of
      personal dignity, of freedom, and so on. In answer to this I said
      something to him. He agreed again. He agreed very readily, in fact.
      Obviously his brain had not a very firm grasp of all these “intellectual
      subjects.”
    

      Up to the time of my departure we strolled together about the Monastery,
      whiling away the long hot day. He never left my side a minute; whether he
      had taken a fancy to me or was afraid of solitude, God only knows! I
      remember we sat together under a clump of yellow acacia in one of the
      little gardens that are scattered on the mountain side.
    

      “I am leaving here in a fortnight,” he said; “it is high
      time.”
    

      “Are you going on foot?”
    

      “From here to Slavyansk I shall walk, then by railway to Nikitovka;
      from Nikitovka the Donets line branches off, and along that branch line I
      shall walk as far as Hatsepetovka, and there a railway guard, I know, will
      help me on my way.”
    

      I thought of the bare, deserted steppe between Nikitovka and Hatsepetovka,
      and pictured to myself Alexandr Ivanitch striding along it, with his
      doubts, his homesickness, and his fear of solitude . . . . He read boredom
      in my face, and sighed.
    

      “And my sister must be married by now,” he said, thinking
      aloud, and at once, to shake off melancholy thoughts, pointed to the top
      of the rock and said:
    

      “From that mountain one can see Izyum.”
    

      As we were walking up the mountain he had a little misfortune. I suppose
      he stumbled, for he slit his cotton trousers and tore the sole of his
      shoe.
    

      “Tss!” he said, frowning as he took off a shoe and exposed a
      bare foot without a stocking. “How unpleasant! . . . That’s a
      complication, you know, which . . . Yes!”
    

      Turning the shoe over and over before his eyes, as though unable to
      believe that the sole was ruined for ever, he spent a long time frowning,
      sighing, and clicking with his tongue.
    

      I had in my trunk a pair of boots, old but fashionable, with pointed toes
      and laces. I had brought them with me in case of need, and only wore them
      in wet weather. When we got back to our room I made up a phrase as
      diplomatic as I could and offered him these boots. He accepted them and
      said with dignity:
    

      “I should thank you, but I know that you consider thanks a
      convention.”
    

      He was pleased as a child with the pointed toes and the laces, and even
      changed his plans.
    

      “Now I shall go to Novotcherkassk in a week, and not in a fortnight,”
      he said, thinking aloud. “In shoes like these I shall not be ashamed
      to show myself to my godfather. I was not going away from here just
      because I hadn’t any decent clothes. . . .”
    

      When the coachman was carrying out my trunk, a lay brother with a good
      ironical face came in to sweep out the room. Alexandr Ivanitch seemed
      flustered and embarrassed and asked him timidly:
    

      “Am I to stay here or go somewhere else?”
    

      He could not make up his mind to occupy a whole room to himself, and
      evidently by now was feeling ashamed of living at the expense of the
      Monastery. He was very reluctant to part from me; to put off being lonely
      as long as possible, he asked leave to see me on my way.
    

      The road from the Monastery, which had been excavated at the cost of no
      little labour in the chalk mountain, moved upwards, going almost like a
      spiral round the mountain, over roots and under sullen overhanging pines.
      . . .
    

      The Donets was the first to vanish from our sight, after it the Monastery
      yard with its thousands of people, and then the green roofs. . . . Since I
      was mounting upwards everything seemed vanishing into a pit. The cross on
      the church, burnished by the rays of the setting sun, gleamed brightly in
      the abyss and vanished. Nothing was left but the oaks, the pines, and the
      white road. But then our carriage came out on a level country, and that
      was all left below and behind us. Alexandr Ivanitch jumped out and,
      smiling mournfully, glanced at me for the last time with his childish
      eyes, and vanished from me for ever. . . .
    

      The impressions of the Holy Mountains had already become memories, and I
      saw something new: the level plain, the whitish-brown distance, the way
      side copse, and beyond it a windmill which stood with out moving, and
      seemed bored at not being allowed to wave its sails because it was a
      holiday.
    











      THE STEPPE
    

The Story of a Journey


      I
    

EARLY one morning
      in July a shabby covered chaise, one of those antediluvian chaises without
      springs in which no one travels in Russia nowadays, except merchant’s
      clerks, dealers and the less well-to-do among priests, drove out of N.,
      the principal town of the province of Z., and rumbled noisily along the
      posting-track. It rattled and creaked at every movement; the pail, hanging
      on behind, chimed in gruffly, and from these sounds alone and from the
      wretched rags of leather hanging loose about its peeling body one could
      judge of its decrepit age and readiness to drop to pieces.
    

      Two of the inhabitants of N. were sitting in the chaise; they were a
      merchant of N. called Ivan Ivanitch Kuzmitchov, a man with a shaven face
      wearing glasses and a straw hat, more like a government clerk than a
      merchant, and Father Christopher Sireysky, the priest of the Church of St.
      Nikolay at N., a little old man with long hair, in a grey canvas cassock,
      a wide-brimmed top-hat and a coloured embroidered girdle. The former was
      absorbed in thought, and kept tossing his head to shake off drowsiness; in
      his countenance an habitual business-like reserve was struggling with the
      genial expression of a man who has just said good-bye to his relatives and
      has had a good drink at parting. The latter gazed with moist eyes
      wonderingly at God’s world, and his smile was so broad that it
      seemed to embrace even the brim of his hat; his face was red and looked
      frozen. Both of them, Father Christopher as well as Kuzmitchov, were going
      to sell wool. At parting with their families they had just eaten heartily
      of pastry puffs and cream, and although it was so early in the morning had
      had a glass or two. . . . Both were in the best of humours.
    

      Apart from the two persons described above and the coachman Deniska, who
      lashed the pair of frisky bay horses, there was another figure in the
      chaise—a boy of nine with a sunburnt face, wet with tears. This was
      Yegorushka, Kuzmitchov’s nephew. With the sanction of his uncle and
      the blessing of Father Christopher, he was now on his way to go to school.
      His mother, Olga Ivanovna, the widow of a collegiate secretary, and
      Kuzmitchov’s sister, who was fond of educated people and refined
      society, had entreated her brother to take Yegorushka with him when he
      went to sell wool and to put him to school; and now the boy was sitting on
      the box beside the coachman Deniska, holding on to his elbow to keep from
      falling off, and dancing up and down like a kettle on the hob, with no
      notion where he was going or what he was going for. The rapid motion
      through the air blew out his red shirt like a balloon on his back and made
      his new hat with a peacock’s feather in it, like a coachman’s,
      keep slipping on to the back of his head. He felt himself an intensely
      unfortunate person, and had an inclination to cry.
    

      When the chaise drove past the prison, Yegorushka glanced at the sentinels
      pacing slowly by the high white walls, at the little barred windows, at
      the cross shining on the roof, and remembered how the week before, on the
      day of the Holy Mother of Kazan, he had been with his mother to the prison
      church for the Dedication Feast, and how before that, at Easter, he had
      gone to the prison with Deniska and Ludmila the cook, and had taken the
      prisoners Easter bread, eggs, cakes and roast beef. The prisoners had
      thanked them and made the sign of the cross, and one of them had given
      Yegorushka a pewter buckle of his own making.
    

      The boy gazed at the familiar places, while the hateful chaise flew by and
      left them all behind. After the prison he caught glimpses of black grimy
      foundries, followed by the snug green cemetery surrounded by a wall of
      cobblestones; white crosses and tombstones, nestling among green
      cherry-trees and looking in the distance like patches of white, peeped out
      gaily from behind the wall. Yegorushka remembered that when the cherries
      were in blossom those white patches melted with the flowers into a sea of
      white; and that when the cherries were ripe the white tombstones and
      crosses were dotted with splashes of red like bloodstains. Under the
      cherry trees in the cemetery Yegorushka’s father and granny, Zinaida
      Danilovna, lay sleeping day and night. When Granny had died she had been
      put in a long narrow coffin and two pennies had been put upon her eyes,
      which would not keep shut. Up to the time of her death she had been brisk,
      and used to bring soft rolls covered with poppy seeds from the market. Now
      she did nothing but sleep and sleep. . . .
    

      Beyond the cemetery came the smoking brickyards. From under the long roofs
      of reeds that looked as though pressed flat to the ground, a thick black
      smoke rose in great clouds and floated lazily upwards. The sky was murky
      above the brickyards and the cemetery, and great shadows from the clouds
      of smoke crept over the fields and across the roads. Men and horses
      covered with red dust were moving about in the smoke near the roofs.
    

      The town ended with the brickyards and the open country began. Yegorushka
      looked at the town for the last time, pressed his face against Deniska’s
      elbow, and wept bitterly.
    

      “Come, not done howling yet, cry-baby!” cried Kuzmitchov.
      “You are blubbering again, little milksop! If you don’t want
      to go, stay behind; no one is taking you by force!
    

      “Never mind, never mind, Yegor boy, never mind,” Father
      Christopher muttered rapidly—“never mind, my boy. . . . Call
      upon God. . . . You are not going for your harm, but for your good.
      Learning is light, as the saying is, and ignorance is darkness. . . . That
      is so, truly.”
    

      “Do you want to go back?” asked Kuzmitchov.
    

      “Yes, . . . yes, . . .” answered Yegorushka, sobbing.
    

      “Well, you’d better go back then. Anyway, you are going for
      nothing; it’s a day’s journey for a spoonful of porridge.”
    

      “Never mind, never mind, my boy,” Father Christopher went on.
      “Call upon God. . . . Lomonosov set off with the fishermen in the
      same way, and he became a man famous all over Europe. Learning in
      conjunction with faith brings forth fruit pleasing to God. What are the
      words of the prayer? For the glory of our Maker, for the comfort of our
      parents, for the benefit of our Church and our country. . . . Yes, indeed!”
    

      “The benefit is not the same in all cases,” said Kuzmitchov,
      lighting a cheap cigar; “some will study twenty years and get no
      sense from it.”
    

      “That does happen.”
    

      “Learning is a benefit to some, but others only muddle their brains.
      My sister is a woman who does not understand; she is set upon refinement,
      and wants to turn Yegorka into a learned man, and she does not understand
      that with my business I could settle Yegorka happily for the rest of his
      life. I tell you this, that if everyone were to go in for being learned
      and refined there would be no one to sow the corn and do the trading; they
      would all die of hunger.”
    

      “And if all go in for trading and sowing corn there will be no one
      to acquire learning.”
    

      And considering that each of them had said something weighty and
      convincing, Kuzmitchov and Father Christopher both looked serious and
      cleared their throats simultaneously.
    

      Deniska, who had been listening to their conversation without
      understanding a word of it, shook his head and, rising in his seat, lashed
      at both the bays. A silence followed.
    

      Meanwhile a wide boundless plain encircled by a chain of low hills lay
      stretched before the travellers’ eyes. Huddling together and peeping
      out from behind one another, these hills melted together into rising
      ground, which stretched right to the very horizon and disappeared into the
      lilac distance; one drives on and on and cannot discern where it begins or
      where it ends. . . . The sun had already peeped out from beyond the town
      behind them, and quietly, without fuss, set to its accustomed task. At
      first in the distance before them a broad, bright, yellow streak of light
      crept over the ground where the earth met the sky, near the little barrows
      and the windmills, which in the distance looked like tiny men waving their
      arms. A minute later a similar streak gleamed a little nearer, crept to
      the right and embraced the hills. Something warm touched Yegorushka’s
      spine; the streak of light, stealing up from behind, darted between the
      chaise and the horses, moved to meet the other streak, and soon the whole
      wide steppe flung off the twilight of early morning, and was smiling and
      sparkling with dew.
    

      The cut rye, the coarse steppe grass, the milkwort, the wild hemp, all
      withered from the sultry heat, turned brown and half dead, now washed by
      the dew and caressed by the sun, revived, to fade again. Arctic petrels
      flew across the road with joyful cries; marmots called to one another in
      the grass. Somewhere, far away to the left, lapwings uttered their
      plaintive notes. A covey of partridges, scared by the chaise, fluttered up
      and with their soft “trrrr!” flew off to the hills. In the
      grass crickets, locusts and grasshoppers kept up their churring,
      monotonous music.
    

      But a little time passed, the dew evaporated, the air grew stagnant, and
      the disillusioned steppe began to wear its jaded July aspect. The grass
      drooped, everything living was hushed. The sun-baked hills, brownish-green
      and lilac in the distance, with their quiet shadowy tones, the plain with
      the misty distance and, arched above them, the sky, which seems terribly
      deep and transparent in the steppes, where there are no woods or high
      hills, seemed now endless, petrified with dreariness. . . .
    

      How stifling and oppressive it was! The chaise raced along, while
      Yegorushka saw always the same—the sky, the plain, the low hills . .
      . . The music in the grass was hushed, the petrels had flown away, the
      partridges were out of sight, rooks hovered idly over the withered grass;
      they were all alike and made the steppe even more monotonous.
    

      A hawk flew just above the ground, with an even sweep of its wings,
      suddenly halted in the air as though pondering on the dreariness of life,
      then fluttered its wings and flew like an arrow over the steppe, and there
      was no telling why it flew off and what it wanted. In the distance a
      windmill waved its sails. . . .
    

      Now and then a glimpse of a white potsherd or a heap of stones broke the
      monotony; a grey stone stood out for an instant or a parched willow with a
      blue crow on its top branch; a marmot would run across the road and—again
      there flitted before the eyes only the high grass, the low hills, the
      rooks. . . .
    

      But at last, thank God, a waggon loaded with sheaves came to meet them; a
      peasant wench was lying on the very top. Sleepy, exhausted by the heat,
      she lifted her head and looked at the travellers. Deniska gaped, looking
      at her; the horses stretched out their noses towards the sheaves; the
      chaise, squeaking, kissed the waggon, and the pointed ears passed over
      Father Christopher’s hat like a brush.
    

      “You are driving over folks, fatty!” cried Deniska. “What
      a swollen lump of a face, as though a bumble-bee had stung it!”
    

      The girl smiled drowsily, and moving her lips lay down again; then a
      solitary poplar came into sight on the low hill. Someone had planted it,
      and God only knows why it was there. It was hard to tear the eyes away
      from its graceful figure and green drapery. Was that lovely creature
      happy? Sultry heat in summer, in winter frost and snowstorms, terrible
      nights in autumn when nothing is to be seen but darkness and nothing is to
      be heard but the senseless angry howling wind, and, worst of all, alone,
      alone for the whole of life . . . . Beyond the poplar stretches of wheat
      extended like a bright yellow carpet from the road to the top of the
      hills. On the hills the corn was already cut and laid up in sheaves, while
      at the bottom they were still cutting. . . . Six mowers were standing in a
      row swinging their scythes, and the scythes gleamed gaily and uttered in
      unison together “Vzhee, vzhee!” From the movements of the
      peasant women binding the sheaves, from the faces of the mowers, from the
      glitter of the scythes, it could be seen that the sultry heat was baking
      and stifling. A black dog with its tongue hanging out ran from the mowers
      to meet the chaise, probably with the intention of barking, but stopped
      halfway and stared indifferently at Deniska, who shook his whip at him; it
      was too hot to bark! One peasant woman got up and, putting both hands to
      her aching back, followed Yegorushka’s red shirt with her eyes.
      Whether it was that the colour pleased her or that he reminded her of her
      children, she stood a long time motionless staring after him.
    

      But now the wheat, too, had flashed by; again the parched plain, the
      sunburnt hills, the sultry sky stretched before them; again a hawk hovered
      over the earth. In the distance, as before, a windmill whirled its sails,
      and still it looked like a little man waving his arms. It was wearisome to
      watch, and it seemed as though one would never reach it, as though it were
      running away from the chaise.
    

      Father Christopher and Kuzmitchov were silent. Deniska lashed the horses
      and kept shouting to them, while Yegorushka had left off crying, and gazed
      about him listlessly. The heat and the tedium of the steppes overpowered
      him. He felt as though he had been travelling and jolting up and down for
      a very long time, that the sun had been baking his back a long time.
      Before they had gone eight miles he began to feel “It must be time
      to rest.” The geniality gradually faded out of his uncle’s
      face and nothing else was left but the air of business reserve; and to a
      gaunt shaven face, especially when it is adorned with spectacles and the
      nose and temples are covered with dust, this reserve gives a relentless,
      inquisitorial appearance. Father Christopher never left off gazing with
      wonder at God’s world, and smiling. Without speaking, he brooded
      over something pleasant and nice, and a kindly, genial smile remained
      imprinted on his face. It seemed as though some nice and pleasant thought
      were imprinted on his brain by the heat.
    

      “Well, Deniska, shall we overtake the waggons to-day?” asked
      Kuzmitchov.
    

      Deniska looked at the sky, rose in his seat, lashed at his horses and then
      answered:
    

      “By nightfall, please God, we shall overtake them.”
    

      There was a sound of dogs barking. Half a dozen steppe sheep-dogs,
      suddenly leaping out as though from ambush, with ferocious howling barks,
      flew to meet the chaise. All of them, extraordinarily furious, surrounded
      the chaise, with their shaggy spider-like muzzles and their eyes red with
      anger, and jostling against one another in their anger, raised a hoarse
      howl. They were filled with passionate hatred of the horses, of the
      chaise, and of the human beings, and seemed ready to tear them into
      pieces. Deniska, who was fond of teasing and beating, was delighted at the
      chance of it, and with a malignant expression bent over and lashed at the
      sheep-dogs with his whip. The brutes growled more than ever, the horses
      flew on; and Yegorushka, who had difficulty in keeping his seat on the
      box, realized, looking at the dogs’ eyes and teeth, that if he fell
      down they would instantly tear him to bits; but he felt no fear and looked
      at them as malignantly as Deniska, and regretted that he had no whip in
      his hand.
    

      The chaise came upon a flock of sheep.
    

      “Stop!” cried Kuzmitchov. “Pull up! Woa!”
    

      Deniska threw his whole body backwards and pulled up the horses.
    

      “Come here!” Kuzmitchov shouted to the shepherd. “Call
      off the dogs, curse them!”
    

      The old shepherd, tattered and barefoot, wearing a fur cap, with a dirty
      sack round his loins and a long crook in his hand—a regular figure
      from the Old Testament—called off the dogs, and taking off his cap,
      went up to the chaise. Another similar Old Testament figure was standing
      motionless at the other end of the flock, staring without interest at the
      travellers.
    

      “Whose sheep are these?” asked Kuzmitchov.
    

      “Varlamov’s,” the old man answered in a loud voice.
    

      “Varlamov’s,” repeated the shepherd standing at the
      other end of the flock.
    

      “Did Varlamov come this way yesterday or not?”
    

      “He did not; his clerk came. . . .”
    

      “Drive on!”
    

      The chaise rolled on and the shepherds, with their angry dogs, were left
      behind. Yegorushka gazed listlessly at the lilac distance in front, and it
      began to seem as though the windmill, waving its sails, were getting
      nearer. It became bigger and bigger, grew quite large, and now he could
      distinguish clearly its two sails. One sail was old and patched, the other
      had only lately been made of new wood and glistened in the sun. The chaise
      drove straight on, while the windmill, for some reason, began retreating
      to the left. They drove on and on, and the windmill kept moving away to
      the left, and still did not disappear.
    

      “A fine windmill Boltva has put up for his son,” observed
      Deniska.
    

      “And how is it we don’t see his farm?”
    

      “It is that way, beyond the creek.”
    

      Boltva’s farm, too, soon came into sight, but yet the windmill did
      not retreat, did not drop behind; it still watched Yegorushka with its
      shining sail and waved. What a sorcerer!
    

      II
    

      Towards midday the chaise turned off the road to the right; it went on a
      little way at walking pace and then stopped. Yegorushka heard a soft, very
      caressing gurgle, and felt a different air breathe on his face with a cool
      velvety touch. Through a little pipe of hemlock stuck there by some
      unknown benefactor, water was running in a thin trickle from a low hill,
      put together by nature of huge monstrous stones. It fell to the ground,
      and limpid, sparkling gaily in the sun, and softly murmuring as though
      fancying itself a great tempestuous torrent, flowed swiftly away to the
      left. Not far from its source the little stream spread itself out into a
      pool; the burning sunbeams and the parched soil greedily drank it up and
      sucked away its strength; but a little further on it must have mingled
      with another rivulet, for a hundred paces away thick reeds showed green
      and luxuriant along its course, and three snipe flew up from them with a
      loud cry as the chaise drove by.
    

      The travellers got out to rest by the stream and feed the horses.
      Kuzmitchov, Father Christopher and Yegorushka sat down on a mat in the
      narrow strip of shade cast by the chaise and the unharnessed horses. The
      nice pleasant thought that the heat had imprinted in Father Christopher’s
      brain craved expression after he had had a drink of water and eaten a
      hard-boiled egg. He bent a friendly look upon Yegorushka, munched, and
      began:
    

      “I studied too, my boy; from the earliest age God instilled into me
      good sense and understanding, so that while I was just such a lad as you I
      was beyond others, a comfort to my parents and preceptors by my good
      sense. Before I was fifteen I could speak and make verses in Latin, just
      as in Russian. I was the crosier-bearer to his Holiness Bishop
      Christopher. After mass one day, as I remember it was the patron saint’s
      day of His Majesty Tsar Alexandr Pavlovitch of blessed memory, he unrobed
      at the altar, looked kindly at me and asked, ‘Puer bone, quam
      appelaris?’ And I answered, ‘Christopherus sum;’ and he
      said, ‘Ergo connominati sumus’—that is, that we were
      namesakes. . . Then he asked in Latin, ‘Whose son are you?’ To
      which I answered, also in Latin, that I was the son of deacon Sireysky of
      the village of Lebedinskoe. Seeing my readiness and the clearness of my
      answers, his Holiness blessed me and said, ‘Write to your father
      that I will not forget him, and that I will keep you in view.’ The
      holy priests and fathers who were standing round the altar, hearing our
      discussion in Latin, were not a little surprised, and everyone expressed
      his pleasure in praise of me. Before I had moustaches, my boy, I could
      read Latin, Greek, and French; I knew philosophy, mathematics, secular
      history, and all the sciences. The Lord gave me a marvellous memory.
      Sometimes, if I read a thing once or twice, I knew it by heart. My
      preceptors and patrons were amazed, and so they expected I should make a
      learned man, a luminary of the Church. I did think of going to Kiev to
      continue my studies, but my parents did not approve. ‘You’ll
      be studying all your life,’ said my father; ‘when shall we see
      you finished?’ Hearing such words, I gave up study and took a post.
      . . . Of course, I did not become a learned man, but then I did not
      disobey my parents; I was a comfort to them in their old age and gave them
      a creditable funeral. Obedience is more than fasting and prayer.
    

      “I suppose you have forgotten all your learning?” observed
      Kuzmitchov.
    

      “I should think so! Thank God, I have reached my eightieth year!
      Something of philosophy and rhetoric I do remember, but languages and
      mathematics I have quite forgotten.”
    

      Father Christopher screwed up his eyes, thought a minute and said in an
      undertone:
    

      “What is a substance? A creature is a self-existing object, not
      requiring anything else for its completion.”
    

      He shook his head and laughed with feeling.
    

      “Spiritual nourishment!” he said. “Of a truth matter
      nourishes the flesh and spiritual nourishment the soul!”
    

      “Learning is all very well,” sighed Kuzmitchov, “but if
      we don’t overtake Varlamov, learning won’t do much for us.”
    

      “A man isn’t a needle—we shall find him. He must be
      going his rounds in these parts.”
    

      Among the sedge were flying the three snipe they had seen before, and in
      their plaintive cries there was a note of alarm and vexation at having
      been driven away from the stream. The horses were steadily munching and
      snorting. Deniska walked about by them and, trying to appear indifferent
      to the cucumbers, pies, and eggs that the gentry were eating, he
      concentrated himself on the gadflies and horseflies that were fastening
      upon the horses’ backs and bellies; he squashed his victims
      apathetically, emitting a peculiar, fiendishly triumphant, guttural sound,
      and when he missed them cleared his throat with an air of vexation and
      looked after every lucky one that escaped death.
    

      “Deniska, where are you? Come and eat,” said Kuzmitchov,
      heaving a deep sigh, a sign that he had had enough.
    

      Deniska diffidently approached the mat and picked out five thick and
      yellow cucumbers (he did not venture to take the smaller and fresher
      ones), took two hard-boiled eggs that looked dark and were cracked, then
      irresolutely, as though afraid he might get a blow on his outstretched
      hand, touched a pie with his finger.
    

      “Take them, take them,” Kuzmitchov urged him on.
    

      Deniska took the pies resolutely, and, moving some distance away, sat down
      on the grass with his back to the chaise. At once there was such a sound
      of loud munching that even the horses turned round to look suspiciously at
      Deniska.
    

      After his meal Kuzmitchov took a sack containing something out of the
      chaise and said to Yegorushka:
    

      “I am going to sleep, and you mind that no one takes the sack from
      under my head.”
    

      Father Christopher took off his cassock, his girdle, and his full coat,
      and Yegorushka, looking at him, was dumb with astonishment. He had never
      imagined that priests wore trousers, and Father Christopher had on real
      canvas trousers thrust into high boots, and a short striped jacket.
      Looking at him, Yegorushka thought that in this costume, so unsuitable to
      his dignified position, he looked with his long hair and beard very much
      like Robinson Crusoe. After taking off their outer garments Kuzmitchov and
      Father Christopher lay down in the shade under the chaise, facing one
      another, and closed their eyes. Deniska, who had finished munching,
      stretched himself out on his back and also closed his eyes.
    

      “You look out that no one takes away the horses!” he said to
      Yegorushka, and at once fell asleep.
    

      Stillness reigned. There was no sound except the munching and snorting of
      the horses and the snoring of the sleepers; somewhere far away a lapwing
      wailed, and from time to time there sounded the shrill cries of the three
      snipe who had flown up to see whether their uninvited visitors had gone
      away; the rivulet babbled, lisping softly, but all these sounds did not
      break the stillness, did not stir the stagnation, but, on the contrary,
      lulled all nature to slumber.
    

      Yegorushka, gasping with the heat, which was particularly oppressive after
      a meal, ran to the sedge and from there surveyed the country. He saw
      exactly the same as he had in the morning: the plain, the low hills, the
      sky, the lilac distance; only the hills stood nearer; and he could not see
      the windmill, which had been left far behind. From behind the rocky hill
      from which the stream flowed rose another, smoother and broader; a little
      hamlet of five or six homesteads clung to it. No people, no trees, no
      shade were to be seen about the huts; it looked as though the hamlet had
      expired in the burning air and was dried up. To while away the time
      Yegorushka caught a grasshopper in the grass, held it in his closed hand
      to his ear, and spent a long time listening to the creature playing on its
      instrument. When he was weary of its music he ran after a flock of yellow
      butterflies who were flying towards the sedge on the watercourse, and
      found himself again beside the chaise, without noticing how he came there.
      His uncle and Father Christopher were sound asleep; their sleep would be
      sure to last two or three hours till the horses had rested. . . . How was
      he to get through that long time, and where was he to get away from the
      heat? A hard problem. . . . Mechanically Yegorushka put his lips to the
      trickle that ran from the waterpipe; there was a chilliness in his mouth
      and there was the smell of hemlock. He drank at first eagerly, then went
      on with effort till the sharp cold had run from his mouth all over his
      body and the water was spilt on his shirt. Then he went up to the chaise
      and began looking at the sleeping figures. His uncle’s face wore, as
      before, an expression of business-like reserve. Fanatically devoted to his
      work, Kuzmitchov always, even in his sleep and at church when they were
      singing, “Like the cherubim,” thought about his business and
      could never forget it for a moment; and now he was probably dreaming about
      bales of wool, waggons, prices, Varlamov. . . . Father Christopher, now, a
      soft, frivolous and absurd person, had never all his life been conscious
      of anything which could, like a boa-constrictor, coil about his soul and
      hold it tight. In all the numerous enterprises he had undertaken in his
      day what attracted him was not so much the business itself, but the bustle
      and the contact with other people involved in every undertaking. Thus, in
      the present expedition, he was not so much interested in wool, in
      Varlamov, and in prices, as in the long journey, the conversations on the
      way, the sleeping under a chaise, and the meals at odd times. . . . And
      now, judging from his face, he must have been dreaming of Bishop
      Christopher, of the Latin discussion, of his wife, of puffs and cream and
      all sorts of things that Kuzmitchov could not possibly dream of.
    

      While Yegorushka was watching their sleeping faces he suddenly heard a
      soft singing; somewhere at a distance a woman was singing, and it was
      difficult to tell where and in what direction. The song was subdued,
      dreary and melancholy, like a dirge, and hardly audible, and seemed to
      come first from the right, then from the left, then from above, and then
      from underground, as though an unseen spirit were hovering over the steppe
      and singing. Yegorushka looked about him, and could not make out where the
      strange song came from. Then as he listened he began to fancy that the
      grass was singing; in its song, withered and half-dead, it was without
      words, but plaintively and passionately, urging that it was not to blame,
      that the sun was burning it for no fault of its own; it urged that it
      ardently longed to live, that it was young and might have been beautiful
      but for the heat and the drought; it was guiltless, but yet it prayed
      forgiveness and protested that it was in anguish, sad and sorry for
      itself. . . .
    

      Yegorushka listened for a little, and it began to seem as though this
      dreary, mournful song made the air hotter, more suffocating and more
      stagnant. . . . To drown the singing he ran to the sedge, humming to
      himself and trying to make a noise with his feet. From there he looked
      about in all directions and found out who was singing. Near the furthest
      hut in the hamlet stood a peasant woman in a short petticoat, with long
      thin legs like a heron. She was sowing something. A white dust floated
      languidly from her sieve down the hillock. Now it was evident that she was
      singing. A couple of yards from her a little bare-headed boy in nothing
      but a smock was standing motionless. As though fascinated by the song, he
      stood stock-still, staring away into the distance, probably at Yegorushka’s
      crimson shirt.
    

      The song ceased. Yegorushka sauntered back to the chaise, and to while
      away the time went again to the trickle of water.
    

      And again there was the sound of the dreary song. It was the same
      long-legged peasant woman in the hamlet over the hill. Yegorushka’s
      boredom came back again. He left the pipe and looked upwards. What he saw
      was so unexpected that he was a little frightened. Just above his head on
      one of the big clumsy stones stood a chubby little boy, wearing nothing
      but a shirt, with a prominent stomach and thin legs, the same boy who had
      been standing before by the peasant woman. He was gazing with open mouth
      and unbElinking eyes at Yegorushka’s crimson shirt and at the
      chaise, with a look of blank astonishment and even fear, as though he saw
      before him creatures of another world. The red colour of the shirt charmed
      and allured him. But the chaise and the men sleeping under it excited his
      curiosity; perhaps he had not noticed how the agreeable red colour and
      curiosity had attracted him down from the hamlet, and now probably he was
      surprised at his own boldness. For a long while Yegorushka stared at him,
      and he at Yegorushka. Both were silent and conscious of some awkwardness.
      After a long silence Yegorushka asked:
    

      “What’s your name?”
    

      The stranger’s cheeks puffed out more than ever; he pressed his back
      against the rock, opened his eyes wide, moved his lips, and answered in a
      husky bass: “Tit!”
    

      The boys said not another word to each other; after a brief silence, still
      keeping his eyes fixed on Yegorushka, the mysterious Tit kicked up one
      leg, felt with his heel for a niche and clambered up the rock; from that
      point he ascended to the next rock, staggering backwards and looking
      intently at Yegorushka, as though afraid he might hit him from behind, and
      so made his way upwards till he disappeared altogether behind the crest of
      the hill.
    

      After watching him out of sight, Yegorushka put his arms round his knees
      and leaned his head on them. . . . The burning sun scorched the back of
      his head, his neck, and his spine. The melancholy song died away, then
      floated again on the stagnant stifling air. The rivulet gurgled
      monotonously, the horses munched, and time dragged on endlessly, as though
      it, too, were stagnant and had come to a standstill. It seemed as though a
      hundred years had passed since the morning. Could it be that God’s
      world, the chaise and the horses would come to a standstill in that air,
      and, like the hills, turn to stone and remain for ever in one spot?
      Yegorushka raised his head, and with smarting eyes looked before him; the
      lilac distance, which till then had been motionless, began heaving, and
      with the sky floated away into the distance. . . . It drew after it the
      brown grass, the sedge, and with extraordinary swiftness Yegorushka
      floated after the flying distance. Some force noiselessly drew him
      onwards, and the heat and the wearisome song flew after in pursuit.
      Yegorushka bent his head and shut his eyes. . . .
    

      Deniska was the first to wake up. Something must have bitten him, for he
      jumped up, quickly scratched his shoulder and said:
    

      “Plague take you, cursed idolater!”
    

      Then he went to the brook, had a drink and slowly washed. His splashing
      and puffing roused Yegorushka from his lethargy. The boy looked at his wet
      face with drops of water and big freckles which made it look like marble,
      and asked:
    

      “Shall we soon be going?”
    

      Deniska looked at the height of the sun and answered:
    

      “I expect so.”
    

      He dried himself with the tail of his shirt and, making a very serious
      face, hopped on one leg.
    

      “I say, which of us will get to the sedge first?” he said.
    

      Yegorushka was exhausted by the heat and drowsiness, but he raced off
      after him all the same. Deniska was in his twentieth year, was a coachman
      and going to be married, but he had not left off being a boy. He was very
      fond of flying kites, chasing pigeons, playing knuckle-bones, running
      races, and always took part in children’s games and disputes. No
      sooner had his master turned his back or gone to sleep than Deniska would
      begin doing something such as hopping on one leg or throwing stones. It
      was hard for any grown-up person, seeing the genuine enthusiasm with which
      he frolicked about in the society of children, to resist saying, “What
      a baby!” Children, on the other hand, saw nothing strange in the
      invasion of their domain by the big coachman. “Let him play,”
      they thought, “as long as he doesn’t fight!” In the same
      way little dogs see nothing strange in it when a simple-hearted big dog
      joins their company uninvited and begins playing with them.
    

      Deniska outstripped Yegorushka, and was evidently very much pleased at
      having done so. He winked at him, and to show that he could hop on one leg
      any distance, suggested to Yegorushka that he should hop with him along
      the road and from there, without resting, back to the chaise. Yegorushka
      declined this suggestion, for he was very much out of breath and
      exhausted.
    

      All at once Deniska looked very grave, as he did not look even when
      Kuzmitchov gave him a scolding or threatened him with a stick; listening
      intently, he dropped quietly on one knee and an expression of sternness
      and alarm came into his face, such as one sees in people who hear
      heretical talk. He fixed his eyes on one spot, raised his hand curved into
      a hollow, and suddenly fell on his stomach on the ground and slapped the
      hollow of his hand down upon the grass.
    

      “Caught!” he wheezed triumphantly, and, getting up, lifted a
      big grasshopper to Yegorushka’s eyes.
    

      The two boys stroked the grasshopper’s broad green back with their
      fingers and touched his antenna, supposing that this would please the
      creature. Then Deniska caught a fat fly that had been sucking blood and
      offered it to the grasshopper. The latter moved his huge jaws, that were
      like the visor of a helmet, with the utmost unconcern, as though he had
      been long acquainted with Deniska, and bit off the fly’s stomach.
      They let him go. With a flash of the pink lining of his wings, he flew
      down into the grass and at once began his churring notes again. They let
      the fly go, too. It preened its wings, and without its stomach flew off to
      the horses.
    

      A loud sigh was heard from under the chaise. It was Kuzmitchov waking up.
      He quickly raised his head, looked uneasily into the distance, and from
      that look, which passed by Yegorushka and Deniska without sympathy or
      interest, it could be seen that his thought on awaking was of the wool and
      of Varlamov.
    

      “Father Christopher, get up; it is time to start,” he said
      anxiously. “Wake up; we’ve slept too long as it is! Deniska,
      put the horses in.”
    

      Father Christopher woke up with the same smile with which he had fallen
      asleep; his face looked creased and wrinkled from sleep, and seemed only
      half the size. After washing and dressing, he proceeded without haste to
      take out of his pocket a little greasy psalter; and standing with his face
      towards the east, began in a whisper repeating the psalms of the day and
      crossing himself.
    

      “Father Christopher,” said Kuzmitchov reproachfully, “it’s
      time to start; the horses are ready, and here are you, . . . upon my word.”
    

      “In a minute, in a minute,” muttered Father Christopher.
      “I must read the psalms. . . . I haven’t read them to-day.”
    

      “The psalms can wait.”
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch, that is my rule every day. . . . I can’t . . .”
    

      “God will overlook it.”
    

      For a full quarter of an hour Father Christopher stood facing the east and
      moving his lips, while Kuzmitchov looked at him almost with hatred and
      impatiently shrugged his shoulders. He was particularly irritated when,
      after every “Hallelujah,” Father Christopher drew a long
      breath, rapidly crossed himself and repeated three times, intentionally
      raising his voice so that the others might cross themselves, “Hallelujah,
      hallelujah, hallelujah! Glory be to Thee, O Lord!” At last he
      smiled, looked upwards at the sky, and, putting the psalter in his pocket,
      said:
    

      “Finis!”
    

      A minute later the chaise had started on the road. As though it were going
      backwards and not forwards, the travellers saw the same scene as they had
      before midday.
    

      The low hills were still plunged in the lilac distance, and no end could
      be seen to them. There were glimpses of high grass and heaps of stones;
      strips of stubble land passed by them and still the same rooks, the same
      hawk, moving its wings with slow dignity, moved over the steppe. The air
      was more sultry than ever; from the sultry heat and the stillness
      submissive nature was spellbound into silence . . . . No wind, no fresh
      cheering sound, no cloud.
    

      But at last, when the sun was beginning to sink into the west, the steppe,
      the hills and the air could bear the oppression no longer, and, driven out
      of all patience, exhausted, tried to fling off the yoke. A fleecy
      ashen-grey cloud unexpectedly appeared behind the hills. It exchanged
      glances with the steppe, as though to say, “Here I am,” and
      frowned. Suddenly something burst in the stagnant air; there was a violent
      squall of wind which whirled round and round, roaring and whistling over
      the steppe. At once a murmur rose from the grass and last year’s dry
      herbage, the dust curled in spiral eddies over the road, raced over the
      steppe, and carrying with it straws, dragon flies and feathers, rose up in
      a whirling black column towards the sky and darkened the sun. Prickly
      uprooted plants ran stumbling and leaping in all directions over the
      steppe, and one of them got caught in the whirlwind, turned round and
      round like a bird, flew towards the sky, and turning into a little black
      speck, vanished from sight. After it flew another, and then a third, and
      Yegorushka saw two of them meet in the blue height and clutch at one
      another as though they were wrestling.
    

      A bustard flew up by the very road. Fluttering his wings and his tail, he
      looked, bathed in the sunshine, like an angler’s glittering tin fish
      or a waterfly flashing so swiftly over the water that its wings cannot be
      told from its antenna, which seem to be growing before, behind and on all
      sides. . . . Quivering in the air like an insect with a shimmer of bright
      colours, the bustard flew high up in a straight line, then, probably
      frightened by a cloud of dust, swerved to one side, and for a long time
      the gleam of his wings could be seen. . . .
    

      Then a corncrake flew up from the grass, alarmed by the hurricane and not
      knowing what was the matter. It flew with the wind and not against it,
      like all the other birds, so that all its feathers were ruffled up and it
      was puffed out to the size of a hen and looked very angry and impressive.
      Only the rooks who had grown old on the steppe and were accustomed to its
      vagaries hovered calmly over the grass, or taking no notice of anything,
      went on unconcernedly pecking with their stout beaks at the hard earth.
    

      There was a dull roll of thunder beyond the hills; there came a whiff of
      fresh air. Deniska gave a cheerful whistle and lashed his horses. Father
      Christopher and Kuzmitchov held their hats and looked intently towards the
      hills. . . . How pleasant a shower of rain would have been!
    

      One effort, one struggle more, and it seemed the steppe would have got the
      upper hand. But the unseen oppressive force gradually riveted its fetters
      on the wind and the air, laid the dust, and the stillness came back again
      as though nothing had happened, the cloud hid, the sun-baked hills frowned
      submissively, the air grew calm, and only somewhere the troubled lapwings
      wailed and lamented their destiny. . . .
    

      Soon after that the evening came on.
    

      III
    

      In the dusk of evening a big house of one storey, with a rusty iron roof
      and with dark windows, came into sight. This house was called a
      posting-inn, though it had nothing like a stableyard, and it stood in the
      middle of the steppe, with no kind of enclosure round it. A little to one
      side of it a wretched little cherry orchard shut in by a hurdle fence made
      a dark patch, and under the windows stood sleepy sunflowers drooping their
      heavy heads. From the orchard came the clatter of a little toy windmill,
      set there to frighten away hares by the rattle. Nothing more could be seen
      near the house, and nothing could be heard but the steppe. The chaise had
      scarcely stopped at the porch with an awning over it, when from the house
      there came the sound of cheerful voices, one a man’s, another a
      woman’s; there was the creak of a swing-door, and in a flash a tall
      gaunt figure, swinging its arms and fluttering its coat, was standing by
      the chaise. This was the innkeeper, Moisey Moisevitch, a man no longer
      young, with a very pale face and a handsome beard as black as charcoal. He
      was wearing a threadbare black coat, which hung flapping on his narrow
      shoulders as though on a hatstand, and fluttered its skirts like wings
      every time Moisey Moisevitch flung up his hands in delight or horror.
      Besides his coat the innkeeper was wearing full white trousers, not stuck
      into his boots, and a velvet waistcoat with brown flowers on it that
      looked like gigantic bugs.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch was at first dumb with excess of feeling on recognizing
      the travellers, then he clasped his hands and uttered a moan. His coat
      swung its skirts, his back bent into a bow, and his pale face twisted into
      a smile that suggested that to see the chaise was not merely a pleasure to
      him, but actually a joy so sweet as to be painful.
    

      “Oh dear! oh dear!” he began in a thin sing-song voice,
      breathless, fussing about and preventing the travellers from getting out
      of the chaise by his antics. “What a happy day for me! Oh, what am I
      to do now? Ivan Ivanitch! Father Christopher! What a pretty little
      gentleman sitting on the box, God strike me dead! Oh, my goodness! why am
      I standing here instead of asking the visitors indoors? Please walk in, I
      humbly beg you. . . . You are kindly welcome! Give me all your things. . .
      . Oh, my goodness me!”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch, who was rummaging in the chaise and assisting the
      travellers to alight, suddenly turned back and shouted in a voice as
      frantic and choking as though he were drowning and calling for help:
    

      “Solomon! Solomon!”
    

      “Solomon! Solomon!” a woman’s voice repeated indoors.
    

      The swing-door creaked, and in the doorway appeared a rather short young
      Jew with a big beak-like nose, with a bald patch surrounded by rough red
      curly hair; he was dressed in a short and very shabby reefer jacket, with
      rounded lappets and short sleeves, and in short serge trousers, so that he
      looked skimpy and short-tailed like an unfledged bird. This was Solomon,
      the brother of Moisey Moisevitch. He went up to the chaise, smiling rather
      queerly, and did not speak or greet the travellers.
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch and Father Christopher have come,” said Moisey
      Moisevitch in a tone as though he were afraid his brother would not
      believe him. “Dear, dear! What a surprise! Such honoured guests to
      have come us so suddenly! Come, take their things, Solomon. Walk in,
      honoured guests.”
    

      A little later Kuzmitchov, Father Christopher, and Yegorushka were sitting
      in a big gloomy empty room at an old oak table. The table was almost in
      solitude, for, except a wide sofa covered with torn American leather and
      three chairs, there was no other furniture in the room. And, indeed, not
      everybody would have given the chairs that name. They were a pitiful
      semblance of furniture, covered with American leather that had seen its
      best days, and with backs bent backwards at an unnaturally acute angle, so
      that they looked like children’s sledges. It was hard to imagine
      what had been the unknown carpenter’s object in bending the
      chairbacks so mercilessly, and one was tempted to imagine that it was not
      the carpenter’s fault, but that some athletic visitor had bent the
      chairs like this as a feat, then had tried to bend them back again and had
      made them worse. The room looked gloomy, the walls were grey, the ceilings
      and the cornices were grimy; on the floor were chinks and yawning holes
      that were hard to account for (one might have fancied they were made by
      the heel of the same athlete), and it seemed as though the room would
      still have been dark if a dozen lamps had hung in it. There was nothing
      approaching an ornament on the walls or the windows. On one wall, however,
      there hung a list of regulations of some sort under a two-headed eagle in
      a grey wooden frame, and on another wall in the same sort of frame an
      engraving with the inscription, “The Indifference of Man.”
      What it was to which men were indifferent it was impossible to make out,
      as the engraving was very dingy with age and was extensively flyblown.
      There was a smell of something decayed and sour in the room.
    

      As he led the visitors into the room, Moisey Moisevitch went on wriggling,
      gesticulating, shrugging and uttering joyful exclamations; he considered
      these antics necessary in order to seem polite and agreeable.
    

      “When did our waggons go by?” Kuzmitchov asked.
    

      “One party went by early this morning, and the other, Ivan Ivanitch,
      put up here for dinner and went on towards evening.”
    

      “Ah! . . . Has Varlamov been by or not?”
    

      “No, Ivan Ivanitch. His clerk, Grigory Yegoritch, went by yesterday
      morning and said that he had to be to-day at the Molokans’ farm.”
    

      “Good! so we will go after the waggons directly and then on to the
      Molokans’.”
    

      “Mercy on us, Ivan Ivanitch!” Moisey Moisevitch cried in
      horror, flinging up his hands. “Where are you going for the night?
      You will have a nice little supper and stay the night, and to-morrow
      morning, please God, you can go on and overtake anyone you like.”
    

      “There is no time for that. . . . Excuse me, Moisey Moisevitch,
      another time; but now I must make haste. We’ll stay a quarter of an
      hour and then go on; we can stay the night at the Molokans’.”
    

      “A quarter of an hour!” squealed Moisey Moisevitch. “Have
      you no fear of God, Ivan Ivanitch? You will compel me to hide your caps
      and lock the door! You must have a cup of tea and a snack of something,
      anyway.”
    

      “We have no time for tea,” said Kuzmitchov.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch bent his head on one side, crooked his knees, and put
      his open hands before him as though warding off a blow, while with a smile
      of agonized sweetness he began imploring:
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch! Father Christopher! Do be so good as to take a cup
      of tea with me. Surely I am not such a bad man that you can’t even
      drink tea in my house? Ivan Ivanitch!”
    

      “Well, we may just as well have a cup of tea,” said Father
      Christopher, with a sympathetic smile; “that won’t keep us
      long.”
    

      “Very well,” Kuzmitchov assented.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch, in a fluster uttered an exclamation of joy, and
      shrugging as though he had just stepped out of cold weather into warm, ran
      to the door and cried in the same frantic voice in which he had called
      Solomon:
    

      “Rosa! Rosa! Bring the samovar!”
    

      A minute later the door opened, and Solomon came into the room carrying a
      large tray in his hands. Setting the tray on the table, he looked away
      sarcastically with the same queer smile as before. Now, by the light of
      the lamp, it was possible to see his smile distinctly; it was very
      complex, and expressed a variety of emotions, but the predominant element
      in it was undisguised contempt. He seemed to be thinking of something
      ludicrous and silly, to be feeling contempt and dislike, to be pleased at
      something and waiting for the favourable moment to turn something into
      ridicule and to burst into laughter. His long nose, his thick lips, and
      his sly prominent eyes seemed tense with the desire to laugh. Looking at
      his face, Kuzmitchov smiled ironically and asked:
    

      “Solomon, why did you not come to our fair at N. this summer, and
      act some Jewish scenes?”
    

      Two years before, as Yegorushka remembered very well, at one of the booths
      at the fair at N., Solomon had performed some scenes of Jewish life, and
      his acting had been a great success. The allusion to this made no
      impression whatever upon Solomon. Making no answer, he went out and
      returned a little later with the samovar.
    

      When he had done what he had to do at the table he moved a little aside,
      and, folding his arms over his chest and thrusting out one leg, fixed his
      sarcastic eyes on Father Christopher. There was something defiant,
      haughty, and contemptuous in his attitude, and at the same time it was
      comic and pitiful in the extreme, because the more impressive his attitude
      the more vividly it showed up his short trousers, his bobtail coat, his
      caricature of a nose, and his bird-like plucked-looking little figure.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch brought a footstool from the other room and sat down a
      little way from the table.
    

      “I wish you a good appetite! Tea and sugar!” he began, trying
      to entertain his visitors. “I hope you will enjoy it. Such rare
      guests, such rare ones; it is years since I last saw Father Christopher.
      And will no one tell me who is this nice little gentleman?” he
      asked, looking tenderly at Yegorushka.
    

      “He is the son of my sister, Olga Ivanovna,” answered
      Kuzmitchov.
    

      “And where is he going?”
    

      “To school. We are taking him to a high school.”
    

      In his politeness, Moisey Moisevitch put on a look of wonder and wagged
      his head expressively.
    

      “Ah, that is a fine thing,” he said, shaking his finger at the
      samovar. “That’s a fine thing. You will come back from the
      high school such a gentleman that we shall all take off our hats to you.
      You will be wealthy and wise and so grand that your mamma will be
      delighted. Oh, that’s a fine thing!”
    

      He paused a little, stroked his knees, and began again in a jocose and
      deferential tone.
    

      “You must excuse me, Father Christopher, but I am thinking of
      writing to the bishop to tell him you are robbing the merchants of their
      living. I shall take a sheet of stamped paper and write that I suppose
      Father Christopher is short of pence, as he has taken up with trade and
      begun selling wool.”
    

      “H’m, yes . . . it’s a queer notion in my old age,”
      said Father Christopher, and he laughed. “I have turned from priest
      to merchant, brother. I ought to be at home now saying my prayers, instead
      of galloping about the country like a Pharaoh in his chariot. . . .
      Vanity!”
    

      “But it will mean a lot of pence!”
    

      “Oh, I dare say! More kicks than halfpence, and serve me right. The
      wool’s not mine, but my son-in-law Mikhail’s!”
    

      “Why doesn’t he go himself?”
    

      “Why, because . . . His mother’s milk is scarcely dry upon his
      lips. He can buy wool all right, but when it comes to selling, he has no
      sense; he is young yet. He has wasted all his money; he wanted to grow
      rich and cut a dash, but he tried here and there, and no one would give
      him his price. And so the lad went on like that for a year, and then he
      came to me and said, ‘Daddy, you sell the wool for me; be kind and
      do it! I am no good at the business!’ And that is true enough. As
      soon as there is anything wrong then it’s ‘Daddy,’ but
      till then they could get on without their dad. When he was buying he did
      not consult me, but now when he is in difficulties it’s Daddy’s
      turn. And what does his dad know about it? If it were not for Ivan
      Ivanitch, his dad could do nothing. I have a lot of worry with them.”
    

      “Yes; one has a lot of worry with one’s children, I can tell
      you that,” sighed Moisey Moisevitch. “I have six of my own.
      One needs schooling, another needs doctoring, and a third needs nursing,
      and when they grow up they are more trouble still. It is not only
      nowadays, it was the same in Holy Scripture. When Jacob had little
      children he wept, and when they grew up he wept still more bitterly.”
    

      “H’m, yes . . .” Father Christopher assented pensively,
      looking at his glass. “I have no cause myself to rail against the
      Lord. I have lived to the end of my days as any man might be thankful to
      live. . . . I have married my daughters to good men, my sons I have set up
      in life, and now I am free; I have done my work and can go where I like. I
      live in peace with my wife. I eat and drink and sleep and rejoice in my
      grandchildren, and say my prayers and want nothing more. I live on the fat
      of the land, and don’t need to curry favour with anyone. I have
      never had any trouble from childhood, and now suppose the Tsar were to ask
      me, ‘What do you need? What would you like?’ why, I don’t
      need anything. I have everything I want and everything to be thankful for.
      In the whole town there is no happier man than I am. My only trouble is I
      have so many sins, but there —only God is without sin. That’s
      right, isn’t it?”
    

      “No doubt it is.”
    

      “I have no teeth, of course; my poor old back aches; there is one
      thing and another, . . . asthma and that sort of thing. . . . I ache. . .
      . The flesh is weak, but then think of my age! I am in the eighties! One
      can’t go on for ever; one mustn’t outstay one’s welcome.”
    

      Father Christopher suddenly thought of something, spluttered into his
      glass and choked with laughter. Moisey Moisevitch laughed, too, from
      politeness, and he, too, cleared his throat.
    

      “So funny!” said Father Christopher, and he waved his hand.
      “My eldest son Gavrila came to pay me a visit. He is in the medical
      line, and is a district doctor in the province of Tchernigov. . . .
      ‘Very well . . .’ I said to him, ‘here I have asthma and
      one thing and another. . . . You are a doctor; cure your father!’ He
      undressed me on the spot, tapped me, listened, and all sorts of tricks, .
      . . kneaded my stomach, and then he said, ‘Dad, you ought to be
      treated with compressed air.’” Father Christopher laughed
      convulsively, till the tears came into his eyes, and got up.
    

      “And I said to him, ‘God bless your compressed air!’”
      he brought out through his laughter, waving both hands. “God bless
      your compressed air!”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch got up, too, and with his hands on his stomach, went off
      into shrill laughter like the yap of a lap-dog.
    

      “God bless the compressed air!” repeated Father Christopher,
      laughing.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch laughed two notes higher and so violently that he could
      hardly stand on his feet.
    

      “Oh dear!” he moaned through his laughter. “Let me get
      my breath . . . . You’ll be the death of me.”
    

      He laughed and talked, though at the same time he was casting timorous and
      suspicious looks at Solomon. The latter was standing in the same attitude
      and still smiling. To judge from his eyes and his smile, his contempt and
      hatred were genuine, but that was so out of keeping with his
      plucked-looking figure that it seemed to Yegorushka as though he were
      putting on his defiant attitude and biting sarcastic smile to play the
      fool for the entertainment of their honoured guests.
    

      After drinking six glasses of tea in silence, Kuzmitchov cleared a space
      before him on the table, took his bag, the one which he kept under his
      head when he slept under the chaise, untied the string and shook it. Rolls
      of paper notes were scattered out of the bag on the table.
    

      “While we have the time, Father Christopher, let us reckon up,”
      said Kuzmitchov.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch was embarrassed at the sight of the money. He got up,
      and, as a man of delicate feeling unwilling to pry into other people’s
      secrets, he went out of the room on tiptoe, swaying his arms. Solomon
      remained where he was.
    

      “How many are there in the rolls of roubles?” Father
      Christopher began.
    

      “The rouble notes are done up in fifties, . . . the three-rouble
      notes in nineties, the twenty-five and hundred roubles in thousands. You
      count out seven thousand eight hundred for Varlamov, and I will count out
      for Gusevitch. And mind you don’t make a mistake. . .”
    

      Yegorushka had never in his life seen so much money as was lying on the
      table before him. There must have been a great deal of money, for the roll
      of seven thousand eight hundred, which Father Christopher put aside for
      Varlamov, seemed very small compared with the whole heap. At any other
      time such a mass of money would have impressed Yegorushka, and would have
      moved him to reflect how many cracknels, buns and poppy-cakes could be
      bought for that money. Now he looked at it listlessly, only conscious of
      the disgusting smell of kerosene and rotten apples that came from the heap
      of notes. He was exhausted by the jolting ride in the chaise, tired out
      and sleepy. His head was heavy, his eyes would hardly keep open and his
      thoughts were tangled like threads. If it had been possible he would have
      been relieved to lay his head on the table, so as not to see the lamp and
      the fingers moving over the heaps of notes, and to have let his tired
      sleepy thoughts go still more at random. When he tried to keep awake, the
      light of the lamp, the cups and the fingers grew double, the samovar
      heaved and the smell of rotten apples seemed even more acrid and
      disgusting.
    

      “Ah, money, money!” sighed Father Christopher, smiling.
      “You bring trouble! Now I expect my Mihailo is asleep and dreaming
      that I am going to bring him a heap of money like this.”
    

      “Your Mihailo Timofevitch is a man who doesn’t understand
      business,” said Kuzmitchov in an undertone; “he undertakes
      what isn’t his work, but you understand and can judge. You had
      better hand over your wool to me, as I have said already, and I would give
      you half a rouble above my own price—yes, I would, simply out of
      regard for you. . . .”
    

      “No, Ivan Ivanitch.” Father Christopher sighed. “I thank
      you for your kindness. . . . Of course, if it were for me to decide, I
      shouldn’t think twice about it; but as it is, the wool is not mine,
      as you know. . . .”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch came in on tiptoe. Trying from delicacy not to look at
      the heaps of money, he stole up to Yegorushka and pulled at his shirt from
      behind.
    

      “Come along, little gentleman,” he said in an undertone,
      “come and see the little bear I can show you! Such a queer, cross
      little bear. Oo-oo!”
    

      The sleepy boy got up and listlessly dragged himself after Moisey
      Moisevitch to see the bear. He went into a little room, where, before he
      saw anything, he felt he could not breathe from the smell of something
      sour and decaying, which was much stronger here than in the big room and
      probably spread from this room all over the house. One part of the room
      was occupied by a big bed, covered with a greasy quilt and another by a
      chest of drawers and heaps of rags of all kinds from a woman’s stiff
      petticoat to children’s little breeches and braces. A tallow candle
      stood on the chest of drawers.
    

      Instead of the promised bear, Yegorushka saw a big fat Jewess with her
      hair hanging loose, in a red flannel skirt with black sprigs on it; she
      turned with difficulty in the narrow space between the bed and the chest
      of drawers and uttered drawn-out moaning as though she had toothache. On
      seeing Yegorushka, she made a doleful, woe-begone face, heaved a long
      drawn-out sigh, and before he had time to look round, put to his lips a
      slice of bread smeared with honey.
    

      “Eat it, dearie, eat it!” she said. “You are here
      without your mamma, and no one to look after you. Eat it up.”
    

      Yegorushka did eat it, though after the goodies and poppy-cakes he had
      every day at home, he did not think very much of the honey, which was
      mixed with wax and bees’ wings. He ate while Moisey Moisevitch and
      the Jewess looked at him and sighed.
    

      “Where are you going, dearie?” asked the Jewess.
    

      “To school,” answered Yegorushka.
    

      “And how many brothers and sisters have you got?”
    

      “I am the only one; there are no others.”
    

      “O-oh!” sighed the Jewess, and turned her eyes upward. “Poor
      mamma, poor mamma! How she will weep and miss you! We are going to send
      our Nahum to school in a year. O-oh!”
    

      “Ah, Nahum, Nahum!” sighed Moisey Moisevitch, and the skin of
      his pale face twitched nervously. “And he is so delicate.”
    

      The greasy quilt quivered, and from beneath it appeared a child’s
      curly head on a very thin neck; two black eyes gleamed and stared with
      curiosity at Yegorushka. Still sighing, Moisey Moisevitch and the Jewess
      went to the chest of drawers and began talking in Yiddish. Moisey
      Moisevitch spoke in a low bass undertone, and altogether his talk in
      Yiddish was like a continual “ghaal-ghaal-ghaal-ghaal, . . .”
      while his wife answered him in a shrill voice like a turkeycock’s,
      and the whole effect of her talk was something like “Too-too-too-too!”
      While they were consulting, another little curly head on a thin neck
      peeped out of the greasy quilt, then a third, then a fourth. . . . If
      Yegorushka had had a fertile imagination he might have imagined that the
      hundred-headed hydra was hiding under the quilt.
    

      “Ghaal-ghaal-ghaal-ghaal!” said Moisey Moisevitch.
    

      “Too-too-too-too!” answered the Jewess.
    

      The consultation ended in the Jewess’s diving with a deep sigh into
      the chest of drawers, and, unwrapping some sort of green rag there, she
      took out a big rye cake made in the shape of a heart.
    

      “Take it, dearie,” she said, giving Yegorushka the cake;
      “you have no mamma now—no one to give you nice things.”
    

      Yegorushka stuck the cake in his pocket and staggered to the door, as he
      could not go on breathing the foul, sour air in which the innkeeper and
      his wife lived. Going back to the big room, he settled himself more
      comfortably on the sofa and gave up trying to check his straying thoughts.
    

      As soon as Kuzmitchov had finished counting out the notes he put them back
      into the bag. He did not treat them very respectfully and stuffed them
      into the dirty sack without ceremony, as indifferently as though they had
      not been money but waste paper.
    

      Father Christopher was talking to Solomon.
    

      “Well, Solomon the Wise!” he said, yawning and making the sign
      of the cross over his mouth. “How is business?”
    

      “What sort of business are you talking about?” asked Solomon,
      and he looked as fiendish, as though it were a hint of some crime on his
      part.
    

      “Oh, things in general. What are you doing?”
    

      “What am I doing?” Solomon repeated, and he shrugged his
      shoulders. “The same as everyone else. . . . You see, I am a menial,
      I am my brother’s servant; my brother’s the servant of the
      visitors; the visitors are Varlamov’s servants; and if I had ten
      millions, Varlamov would be my servant.”
    

      “Why would he be your servant?”
    

      “Why, because there isn’t a gentleman or millionaire who isn’t
      ready to lick the hand of a scabby Jew for the sake of making a kopeck.
      Now, I am a scabby Jew and a beggar. Everybody looks at me as though I
      were a dog, but if I had money Varlamov would play the fool before me just
      as Moisey does before you.”
    

      Father Christopher and Kuzmitchov looked at each other. Neither of them
      understood Solomon. Kuzmitchov looked at him sternly and dryly, and asked:
    

      “How can you compare yourself with Varlamov, you blockhead?”
    

      “I am not such a fool as to put myself on a level with Varlamov,”
      answered Solomon, looking sarcastically at the speaker. “Though
      Varlamov is a Russian, he is at heart a scabby Jew; money and gain are all
      he lives for, but I threw my money in the stove! I don’t want money,
      or land, or sheep, and there is no need for people to be afraid of me and
      to take off their hats when I pass. So I am wiser than your Varlamov and
      more like a man!”
    

      A little later Yegorushka, half asleep, heard Solomon in a hoarse hollow
      voice choked with hatred, in hurried stuttering phrases, talking about the
      Jews. At first he talked correctly in Russian, then he fell into the tone
      of a Jewish recitation, and began speaking as he had done at the fair with
      an exaggerated Jewish accent.
    

      “Stop! . . .” Father Christopher said to him. “If you
      don’t like your religion you had better change it, but to laugh at
      it is a sin; it is only the lowest of the low who will make fun of his
      religion.”
    

      “You don’t understand,” Solomon cut him short rudely.
      “I am talking of one thing and you are talking of something else. .
      . .”
    

      “One can see you are a foolish fellow,” sighed Father
      Christopher. “I admonish you to the best of my ability, and you are
      angry. I speak to you like an old man quietly, and you answer like a
      turkeycock: ‘Bla—-bla—-bla!’ You really are a
      queer fellow. . . .”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch came in. He looked anxiously at Solomon and at his
      visitors, and again the skin on his face quivered nervously. Yegorushka
      shook his head and looked about him; he caught a passing glimpse of
      Solomon’s face at the very moment when it was turned three-quarters
      towards him and when the shadow of his long nose divided his left cheek in
      half; the contemptuous smile mingled with that shadow; the gleaming
      sarcastic eyes, the haughty expression, and the whole plucked-looking
      little figure, dancing and doubling itself before Yegorushka’s eyes,
      made him now not like a buffoon, but like something one sometimes dreams
      of, like an evil spirit.
    

      “What a ferocious fellow you’ve got here, Moisey Moisevitch!
      God bless him!” said Father Christopher with a smile. “You
      ought to find him a place or a wife or something. . . . There’s no
      knowing what to make of him. . . .”
    

      Kuzmitchov frowned angrily. Moisey Moisevitch looked uneasily and
      inquiringly at his brother and the visitors again.
    

      “Solomon, go away!” he said shortly. “Go away!”
      and he added something in Yiddish. Solomon gave an abrupt laugh and went
      out.
    

      “What was it?” Moisey Moisevitch asked Father Christopher
      anxiously.
    

      “He forgets himself,” answered Kuzmitchov. “He’s
      rude and thinks too much of himself.”
    

      “I knew it!” Moisey Moisevitch cried in horror, clasping his
      hands. “Oh dear, oh dear!” he muttered in a low voice. “Be
      so kind as to excuse it, and don’t be angry. He is such a queer
      fellow, such a queer fellow! Oh dear, oh dear! He is my own brother, but I
      have never had anything but trouble from him. You know he’s. . .”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch crooked his finger by his forehead and went on:
    

      “He is not in his right mind; . . . he’s hopeless. And I don’t
      know what I am to do with him! He cares for nobody, he respects nobody,
      and is afraid of nobody. . . . You know he laughs at everybody, he says
      silly things, speaks familiarly to anyone. You wouldn’t believe it,
      Varlamov came here one day and Solomon said such things to him that he
      gave us both a taste of his whip. . . . But why whip me? Was it my fault?
      God has robbed him of his wits, so it is God’s will, and how am I to
      blame?”
    

      Ten minutes passed and Moisey Moisevitch was still muttering in an
      undertone and sighing:
    

      “He does not sleep at night, and is always thinking and thinking and
      thinking, and what he is thinking about God only knows. If you go to him
      at night he is angry and laughs. He doesn’t like me either . . . .
      And there is nothing he wants! When our father died he left us each six
      thousand roubles. I bought myself an inn, married, and now I have
      children; and he burnt all his money in the stove. Such a pity, such a
      pity! Why burn it? If he didn’t want it he could give it to me, but
      why burn it?”
    

      Suddenly the swing-door creaked and the floor shook under footsteps.
      Yegorushka felt a draught of cold air, and it seemed to him as though some
      big black bird had passed by him and had fluttered its wings close in his
      face. He opened his eyes. . . . His uncle was standing by the sofa with
      his sack in his hands ready for departure; Father Christopher, holding his
      broad-brimmed top-hat, was bowing to someone and smiling—not his
      usual soft kindly smile, but a respectful forced smile which did not suit
      his face at all—while Moisey Moisevitch looked as though his body
      had been broken into three parts, and he were balancing and doing his
      utmost not to drop to pieces. Only Solomon stood in the corner with his
      arms folded, as though nothing had happened, and smiled contemptuously as
      before.
    

      “Your Excellency must excuse us for not being tidy,” moaned
      Moisey Moisevitch with the agonizingly sweet smile, taking no more notice
      of Kuzmitchov or Father Christopher, but swaying his whole person so as to
      avoid dropping to pieces. “We are plain folks, your Excellency.”
    

      Yegorushka rubbed his eyes. In the middle of the room there really was
      standing an Excellency, in the form of a young plump and very beautiful
      woman in a black dress and a straw hat. Before Yegorushka had time to
      examine her features the image of the solitary graceful poplar he had seen
      that day on the hill for some reason came into his mind.
    

      “Has Varlamov been here to-day?” a woman’s voice
      inquired.
    

      “No, your Excellency,” said Moisey Moisevitch.
    

      “If you see him to-morrow, ask him to come and see me for a minute.”
    

      All at once, quite unexpectedly, Yegorushka saw half an inch from his eyes
      velvety black eyebrows, big brown eyes, delicate feminine cheeks with
      dimples, from which smiles seemed radiating all over the face like
      sunbeams. There was a glorious scent.
    

      “What a pretty boy!” said the lady. “Whose boy is it?
      Kazimir Mihalovitch, look what a charming fellow! Good heavens, he is
      asleep!”
    

      And the lady kissed Yegorushka warmly on both cheeks, and he smiled and,
      thinking he was asleep, shut his eyes. The swing-door squeaked, and there
      was the sound of hurried footsteps, coming in and going out.
    

      “Yegorushka, Yegorushka!” he heard two bass voices whisper.
      “Get up; it is time to start.”
    

      Somebody, it seemed to be Deniska, set him on his feet and led him by the
      arm. On the way he half-opened his eyes and once more saw the beautiful
      lady in the black dress who had kissed him. She was standing in the middle
      of the room and watched him go out, smiling at him and nodding her head in
      a friendly way. As he got near the door he saw a handsome, stoutly built,
      dark man in a bowler hat and in leather gaiters. This must have been the
      lady’s escort.
    

      “Woa!” he heard from the yard.
    

      At the front door Yegorushka saw a splendid new carriage and a pair of
      black horses. On the box sat a groom in livery, with a long whip in his
      hands. No one but Solomon came to see the travellers off. His face was
      tense with a desire to laugh; he looked as though he were waiting
      impatiently for the visitors to be gone, so that he might laugh at them
      without restraint.
    

      “The Countess Dranitsky,” whispered Father Christopher,
      clambering into the chaise.
    

      “Yes, Countess Dranitsky,” repeated Kuzmitchov, also in a
      whisper.
    

      The impression made by the arrival of the countess was probably very
      great, for even Deniska spoke in a whisper, and only ventured to lash his
      bays and shout when the chaise had driven a quarter of a mile away and
      nothing could be seen of the inn but a dim light.
    

      IV
    

      Who was this elusive, mysterious Varlamov of whom people talked so much,
      whom Solomon despised, and whom even the beautiful countess needed?
      Sitting on the box beside Deniska, Yegorushka, half asleep, thought about
      this person. He had never seen him. But he had often heard of him and
      pictured him in his imagination. He knew that Varlamov possessed several
      tens of thousands of acres of land, about a hundred thousand sheep, and a
      great deal of money. Of his manner of life and occupation Yegorushka knew
      nothing, except that he was always “going his rounds in these parts,”
      and he was always being looked for.
    

      At home Yegorushka had heard a great deal of the Countess Dranitsky, too.
      She, too, had some tens of thousands of acres, a great many sheep, a stud
      farm and a great deal of money, but she did not “go rounds,”
      but lived at home in a splendid house and grounds, about which Ivan
      Ivanitch, who had been more than once at the countess’s on business,
      and other acquaintances told many marvellous tales; thus, for instance,
      they said that in the countess’s drawing-room, where the portraits
      of all the kings of Poland hung on the walls, there was a big table-clock
      in the form of a rock, on the rock a gold horse with diamond eyes,
      rearing, and on the horse the figure of a rider also of gold, who
      brandished his sword to right and to left whenever the clock struck. They
      said, too, that twice a year the countess used to give a ball, to which
      the gentry and officials of the whole province were invited, and to which
      even Varlamov used to come; all the visitors drank tea from silver
      samovars, ate all sorts of extraordinary things (they had strawberries and
      raspberries, for instance, in winter at Christmas), and danced to a band
      which played day and night. . . .
    

      “And how beautiful she is,” thought Yegorushka, remembering
      her face and smile.
    

      Kuzmitchov, too, was probably thinking about the countess. For when the
      chaise had driven a mile and a half he said:
    

      “But doesn’t that Kazimir Mihalovitch plunder her right and
      left! The year before last when, do you remember, I bought some wool from
      her, he made over three thousand from my purchase alone.”
    

      “That is just what you would expect from a Pole,” said Father
      Christopher.
    

      “And little does it trouble her. Young and foolish, as they say, her
      head is full of nonsense.”
    

      Yegorushka, for some reason, longed to think of nothing but Varlamov and
      the countess, particularly the latter. His drowsy brain utterly refused
      ordinary thoughts, was in a cloud and retained only fantastic fairy-tale
      images, which have the advantage of springing into the brain of themselves
      without any effort on the part of the thinker, and completely vanishing of
      themselves at a mere shake of the head; and, indeed, nothing that was
      around him disposed to ordinary thoughts. On the right there were the dark
      hills which seemed to be screening something unseen and terrible; on the
      left the whole sky about the horizon was covered with a crimson glow, and
      it was hard to tell whether there was a fire somewhere, or whether it was
      the moon about to rise. As by day the distance could be seen, but its
      tender lilac tint had gone, quenched by the evening darkness, in which the
      whole steppe was hidden like Moisey Moisevitch’s children under the
      quilt.
    

      Corncrakes and quails do not call in the July nights, the nightingale does
      not sing in the woodland marsh, and there is no scent of flowers, but
      still the steppe is lovely and full of life. As soon as the sun goes down
      and the darkness enfolds the earth, the day’s weariness is
      forgotten, everything is forgiven, and the steppe breathes a light sigh
      from its broad bosom. As though because the grass cannot see in the dark
      that it has grown old, a gay youthful twitter rises up from it, such as is
      not heard by day; chirruping, twittering, whistling, scratching, the
      basses, tenors and sopranos of the steppe all mingle in an incessant,
      monotonous roar of sound in which it is sweet to brood on memories and
      sorrows. The monotonous twitter soothes to sleep like a lullaby; you drive
      and feel you are falling asleep, but suddenly there comes the abrupt
      agitated cry of a wakeful bird, or a vague sound like a voice crying out
      in wonder “A-ah, a-ah!” and slumber closes one’s eyelids
      again. Or you drive by a little creek where there are bushes and hear the
      bird, called by the steppe dwellers “the sleeper,” call
      “Asleep, asleep, asleep!” while another laughs or breaks into
      trills of hysterical weeping—that is the owl. For whom do they call
      and who hears them on that plain, God only knows, but there is deep
      sadness and lamentation in their cry. . . . There is a scent of hay and
      dry grass and belated flowers, but the scent is heavy, sweetly mawkish and
      soft.
    

      Everything can be seen through the mist, but it is hard to make out the
      colours and the outlines of objects. Everything looks different from what
      it is. You drive on and suddenly see standing before you right in the
      roadway a dark figure like a monk; it stands motionless, waiting, holding
      something in its hands. . . . Can it be a robber? The figure comes closer,
      grows bigger; now it is on a level with the chaise, and you see it is not
      a man, but a solitary bush or a great stone. Such motionless expectant
      figures stand on the low hills, hide behind the old barrows, peep out from
      the high grass, and they all look like human beings and arouse suspicion.
    

      And when the moon rises the night becomes pale and dim. The mist seems to
      have passed away. The air is transparent, fresh and warm; one can see well
      in all directions and even distinguish the separate stalks of grass by the
      wayside. Stones and bits of pots can be seen at a long distance. The
      suspicious figures like monks look blacker against the light background of
      the night, and seem more sinister. More and more often in the midst of the
      monotonous chirruping there comes the sound of the “A-ah, a-ah!”
      of astonishment troubling the motionless air, and the cry of a sleepless
      or delirious bird. Broad shadows move across the plain like clouds across
      the sky, and in the inconceivable distance, if you look long and intently
      at it, misty monstrous shapes rise up and huddle one against another. . .
      . It is rather uncanny. One glances at the pale green, star-spangled sky
      on which there is no cloudlet, no spot, and understands why the warm air
      is motionless, why nature is on her guard, afraid to stir: she is afraid
      and reluctant to lose one instant of life. Of the unfathomable depth and
      infinity of the sky one can only form a conception at sea and on the
      steppe by night when the moon is shining. It is terribly lonely and
      caressing; it looks down languid and alluring, and its caressing sweetness
      makes one giddy.
    

      You drive on for one hour, for a second. . . . You meet upon the way a
      silent old barrow or a stone figure put up God knows when and by whom; a
      nightbird floats noiselessly over the earth, and little by little those
      legends of the steppes, the tales of men you have met, the stories of some
      old nurse from the steppe, and all the things you have managed to see and
      treasure in your soul, come back to your mind. And then in the churring of
      insects, in the sinister figures, in the ancient barrows, in the blue sky,
      in the moonlight, in the flight of the nightbird, in everything you see
      and hear, triumphant beauty, youth, the fulness of power, and the
      passionate thirst for life begin to be apparent; the soul responds to the
      call of her lovely austere fatherland, and longs to fly over the steppes
      with the nightbird. And in the triumph of beauty, in the exuberance of
      happiness you are conscious of yearning and grief, as though the steppe
      knew she was solitary, knew that her wealth and her inspiration were
      wasted for the world, not glorified in song, not wanted by anyone; and
      through the joyful clamour one hears her mournful, hopeless call for
      singers, singers!
    

      “Woa! Good-evening, Panteley! Is everything all right?”
    

      “First-rate, Ivan Ivanitch!
    

      “Haven’t you seen Varlamov, lads?”
    

      “No, we haven’t.”
    

      Yegorushka woke up and opened his eyes. The chaise had stopped. On the
      right the train of waggons stretched for a long way ahead on the road, and
      men were moving to and fro near them. All the waggons being loaded up with
      great bales of wool looked very high and fat, while the horses looked
      short-legged and little.
    

      “Well, then, we shall go on to the Molokans’!”
      Kuzmitchov said aloud. “The Jew told us that Varlamov was putting up
      for the night at the Molokans’. So good-bye, lads! Good luck to you!”
    

      “Good-bye, Ivan Ivanitch,” several voices replied.
    

      “I say, lads,” Kuzmitchov cried briskly, “you take my
      little lad along with you! Why should he go jolting off with us for
      nothing? You put him on the bales, Panteley, and let him come on slowly,
      and we shall overtake you. Get down, Yegor! Go on; it’s all right. .
      . .”
    

      Yegorushka got down from the box-seat. Several hands caught him, lifted
      him high into the air, and he found himself on something big, soft, and
      rather wet with dew. It seemed to him now as though the sky were quite
      close and the earth far away.
    

      “Hey, take his little coat!” Deniska shouted from somewhere
      far below.
    

      His coat and bundle flung up from far below fell close to Yegorushka.
      Anxious not to think of anything, he quickly put his bundle under his head
      and covered himself with his coat, and stretching his legs out and
      shrinking a little from the dew, he laughed with content.
    

      “Sleep, sleep, sleep, . . .” he thought.
    

      “Don’t be unkind to him, you devils!” he heard Deniska’s
      voice below.
    

      “Good-bye, lads; good luck to you,” shouted Kuzmitchov.
      “I rely upon you!”
    

      “Don’t you be uneasy, Ivan Ivanitch!”
    

      Deniska shouted to the horses, the chaise creaked and started, not along
      the road, but somewhere off to the side. For two minutes there was
      silence, as though the waggons were asleep and there was no sound except
      the clanking of the pails tied on at the back of the chaise as it slowly
      died away in the distance. Then someone at the head of the waggons
      shouted:
    

      “Kiruha! Sta-art!”
    

      The foremost of the waggons creaked, then the second, then the third. . .
      . Yegorushka felt the waggon he was on sway and creak also. The waggons
      were moving. Yegorushka took a tighter hold of the cord with which the
      bales were tied on, laughed again with content, shifted the cake in his
      pocket, and fell asleep just as he did in his bed at home. . . .
    

      When he woke up the sun had risen, it was screened by an ancient barrow,
      and, trying to shed its light upon the earth, it scattered its beams in
      all directions and flooded the horizon with gold. It seemed to Yegorushka
      that it was not in its proper place, as the day before it had risen behind
      his back, and now it was much more to his left. . . . And the whole
      landscape was different. There were no hills now, but on all sides,
      wherever one looked, there stretched the brown cheerless plain; here and
      there upon it small barrows rose up and rooks flew as they had done the
      day before. The belfries and huts of some village showed white in the
      distance ahead; as it was Sunday the Little Russians were at home baking
      and cooking—that could be seen by the smoke which rose from every
      chimney and hung, a dark blue transparent veil, over the village. In
      between the huts and beyond the church there were blue glimpses of a
      river, and beyond the river a misty distance. But nothing was so different
      from yesterday as the road. Something extraordinarily broad, spread out
      and titanic, stretched over the steppe by way of a road. It was a grey
      streak well trodden down and covered with dust, like all roads. Its width
      puzzled Yegorushka and brought thoughts of fairy tales to his mind. Who
      travelled along that road? Who needed so much space? It was strange and
      unintelligible. It might have been supposed that giants with immense
      strides, such as Ilya Muromets and Solovy the Brigand, were still
      surviving in Russia, and that their gigantic steeds were still alive.
      Yegorushka, looking at the road, imagined some half a dozen high chariots
      racing along side by side, like some he used to see in pictures in his
      Scripture history; these chariots were each drawn by six wild furious
      horses, and their great wheels raised a cloud of dust to the sky, while
      the horses were driven by men such as one may see in one’s dreams or
      in imagination brooding over fairy tales. And if those figures had
      existed, how perfectly in keeping with the steppe and the road they would
      have been!
    

      Telegraph-poles with two wires on them stretched along the right side of
      the road to its furthermost limit. Growing smaller and smaller they
      disappeared near the village behind the huts and green trees, and then
      again came into sight in the lilac distance in the form of very small thin
      sticks that looked like pencils stuck into the ground. Hawks, falcons, and
      crows sat on the wires and looked indifferently at the moving waggons.
    

      Yegorushka was lying in the last of the waggons, and so could see the
      whole string. There were about twenty waggons, and there was a driver to
      every three waggons. By the last waggon, the one in which Yegorushka was,
      there walked an old man with a grey beard, as short and lean as Father
      Christopher, but with a sunburnt, stern and brooding face. It is very
      possible that the old man was not stern and not brooding, but his red
      eyelids and his sharp long nose gave his face a stern frigid expression
      such as is common with people in the habit of continually thinking of
      serious things in solitude. Like Father Christopher he was wearing a
      wide-brimmed top-hat, not like a gentleman’s, but made of brown
      felt, and in shape more like a cone with the top cut off than a real
      top-hat. Probably from a habit acquired in cold winters, when he must more
      than once have been nearly frozen as he trudged beside the waggons, he
      kept slapping his thighs and stamping with his feet as he walked. Noticing
      that Yegorushka was awake, he looked at him and said, shrugging his
      shoulders as though from the cold:
    

      “Ah, you are awake, youngster! So you are the son of Ivan Ivanitch?”
    

      “No; his nephew. . . .”
    

      “Nephew of Ivan Ivanitch? Here I have taken off my boots and am
      hopping along barefoot. My feet are bad; they are swollen, and it’s
      easier without my boots . . . easier, youngster . . . without boots, I
      mean. . . . So you are his nephew? He is a good man; no harm in him. . . .
      God give him health. . . . No harm in him . . . I mean Ivan Ivanitch. . .
      . He has gone to the Molokans’. . . . O Lord, have mercy upon us!”
    

      The old man talked, too, as though it were very cold, pausing and not
      opening his mouth properly; and he mispronounced the labial consonants,
      stuttering over them as though his lips were frozen. As he talked to
      Yegorushka he did not once smile, and he seemed stern.
    

      Two waggons ahead of them there walked a man wearing a long reddish-brown
      coat, a cap and high boots with sagging bootlegs and carrying a whip in
      his hand. This was not an old man, only about forty. When he looked round
      Yegorushka saw a long red face with a scanty goat-beard and a spongy
      looking swelling under his right eye. Apart from this very ugly swelling,
      there was another peculiar thing about him which caught the eye at once:
      in his left hand he carried a whip, while he waved the right as though he
      were conducting an unseen choir; from time to time he put the whip under
      his arm, and then he conducted with both hands and hummed something to
      himself.
    

      The next driver was a long rectilinear figure with extremely sloping
      shoulders and a back as flat as a board. He held himself as stiffly erect
      as though he were marching or had swallowed a yard measure. His hands did
      not swing as he walked, but hung down as if they were straight sticks, and
      he strode along in a wooden way, after the manner of toy soldiers, almost
      without bending his knees, and trying to take as long steps as possible.
      While the old man or the owner of the spongy swelling were taking two
      steps he succeeded in taking only one, and so it seemed as though he were
      walking more slowly than any of them, and would drop behind. His face was
      tied up in a rag, and on his head something stuck up that looked like a
      monk’s peaked cap; he was dressed in a short Little Russian coat,
      with full dark blue trousers and bark shoes.
    

      Yegorushka did not even distinguish those that were farther on. He lay on
      his stomach, picked a little hole in the bale, and, having nothing better
      to do, began twisting the wool into a thread. The old man trudging along
      below him turned out not to be so stern as one might have supposed from
      his face. Having begun a conversation, he did not let it drop.
    

      “Where are you going?” he asked, stamping with his feet.
    

      “To school,” answered Yegorushka.
    

      “To school? Aha! . . . Well, may the Queen of Heaven help you. Yes.
      One brain is good, but two are better. To one man God gives one brain, to
      another two brains, and to another three. . . . To another three, that is
      true. . . . One brain you are born with, one you get from learning, and a
      third with a good life. So you see, my lad, it is a good thing if a man
      has three brains. Living is easier for him, and, what’s more, dying
      is, too. Dying is, too. . . . And we shall all die for sure.”
    

      The old man scratched his forehead, glanced upwards at Yegorushka with his
      red eyes, and went on:
    

      “Maxim Nikolaitch, the gentleman from Slavyanoserbsk, brought a
      little lad to school, too, last year. I don’t know how he is getting
      on there in studying the sciences, but he was a nice good little lad. . .
      . God give them help, they are nice gentlemen. Yes, he, too, brought his
      boy to school. . . . In Slavyanoserbsk there is no establishment, I
      suppose, for study. No. . . . But it is a nice town. . . . There’s
      an ordinary school for simple folks, but for the higher studies there is
      nothing. No, that’s true. What’s your name? . . .”
    

      “Yegorushka.”
    

      “Yegory, then. . . . The holy martyr Yegory, the Bearer of Victory,
      whose day is the twenty-third of April. And my christian name is Panteley,
      . . . Panteley Zaharov Holodov. . . . We are Holodovs . . . . I am a
      native of—maybe you’ve heard of it—Tim in the province
      of Kursk. My brothers are artisans and work at trades in the town, but I
      am a peasant. . . . I have remained a peasant. Seven years ago I went
      there—home, I mean. I went to the village and to the town. . . . To
      Tim, I mean. Then, thank God, they were all alive and well; . . . but now
      I don’t know. . . . Maybe some of them are dead. . . . And it’s
      time they did die, for some of them are older than I am. Death is all
      right; it is good so long, of course, as one does not die without
      repentance. There is no worse evil than an impenitent death; an impenitent
      death is a joy to the devil. And if you want to die penitent, so that you
      may not be forbidden to enter the mansions of the Lord, pray to the holy
      martyr Varvara. She is the intercessor. She is, that’s the truth. .
      . . For God has given her such a place in the heavens that everyone has
      the right to pray to her for penitence.”
    

      Panteley went on muttering, and apparently did not trouble whether
      Yegorushka heard him or not. He talked listlessly, mumbling to himself,
      without raising or dropping his voice, but succeeded in telling him a
      great deal in a short time. All he said was made up of fragments that had
      very little connection with one another, and quite uninteresting for
      Yegorushka. Possibly he talked only in order to reckon over his thoughts
      aloud after the night spent in silence, in order to see if they were all
      there. After talking of repentance, he spoke about a certain Maxim
      Nikolaitch from Slavyanoserbsk.
    

      “Yes, he took his little lad; . . . he took him, that’s true .
      . .”
    

      One of the waggoners walking in front darted from his place, ran to one
      side and began lashing on the ground with his whip. He was a stalwart,
      broad-shouldered man of thirty, with curly flaxen hair and a look of great
      health and vigour. Judging from the movements of his shoulders and the
      whip, and the eagerness expressed in his attitude, he was beating
      something alive. Another waggoner, a short stubby little man with a bushy
      black beard, wearing a waistcoat and a shirt outside his trousers, ran up
      to him. The latter broke into a deep guffaw of laughter and coughing and
      said: “I say, lads, Dymov has killed a snake!”
    

      There are people whose intelligence can be gauged at once by their voice
      and laughter. The man with the black beard belonged to that class of
      fortunate individuals; impenetrable stupidity could be felt in his voice
      and laugh. The flaxen-headed Dymov had finished, and lifting from the
      ground with his whip something like a cord, flung it with a laugh into the
      cart.
    

      “That’s not a viper; it’s a grass snake!” shouted
      someone.
    

      The man with the wooden gait and the bandage round his face strode up
      quickly to the dead snake, glanced at it and flung up his stick-like arms.
    

      “You jail-bird!” he cried in a hollow wailing voice. “What
      have you killed a grass snake for? What had he done to you, you damned
      brute? Look, he has killed a grass snake; how would you like to be treated
      so?”
    

      “Grass snakes ought not to be killed, that’s true,”
      Panteley muttered placidly, “they ought not. . . They are not
      vipers; though it looks like a snake, it is a gentle, innocent creature. .
      . . It’s friendly to man, the grass snake is.”
    

      Dymov and the man with the black beard were probably ashamed, for they
      laughed loudly, and not answering, slouched lazily back to their waggons.
      When the hindmost waggon was level with the spot where the dead snake lay,
      the man with his face tied up standing over it turned to Panteley and
      asked in a tearful voice:
    

      “Grandfather, what did he want to kill the grass snake for?”
    

      His eyes, as Yegorushka saw now, were small and dingy looking; his face
      was grey, sickly and looked somehow dingy too while his chin was red and
      seemed very much swollen.
    

      “Grandfather, what did he kill it for?” he repeated, striding
      along beside Panteley.
    

      “A stupid fellow. His hands itch to kill, and that is why he does
      it,” answered the old man; “but he oughtn’t to kill a
      grass snake, that’s true. . . . Dymov is a ruffian, we all know, he
      kills everything he comes across, and Kiruha did not interfere. He ought
      to have taken its part, but instead of that, he goes off into ‘Ha-ha-ha!’
      and ‘Ho-ho-ho!’ . . . But don’t be angry, Vassya. . . .
      Why be angry? They’ve killed it—well, never mind them. Dymov
      is a ruffian and Kiruha acted from foolishness—never mind. . . .
      They are foolish people without understanding—but there, don’t
      mind them. Emelyan here never touches what he shouldn’t; he never
      does; . . . that is true, . . . because he is a man of education, while
      they are stupid. . . . Emelyan, he doesn’t touch things.”
    

      The waggoner in the reddish-brown coat and the spongy swelling on his
      face, who was conducting an unseen choir, stopped. Hearing his name, and
      waiting till Panteley and Vassya came up to him, he walked beside them.
    

      “What are you talking about?” he asked in a husky muffled
      voice.
    

      “Why, Vassya here is angry,” said Panteley. “So I have
      been saying things to him to stop his being angry. . . . Oh, how my
      swollen feet hurt! Oh, oh! They are more inflamed than ever for Sunday,
      God’s holy day!”
    

      “It’s from walking,” observed Vassya.
    

      “No, lad, no. It’s not from walking. When I walk it seems
      easier; when I lie down and get warm, . . . it’s deadly. Walking is
      easier for me.”
    

      Emelyan, in his reddish-brown coat, walked between Panteley and Vassya and
      waved his arms, as though they were going to sing. After waving them a
      little while he dropped them, and croaked out hopelessly:
    

      “I have no voice. It’s a real misfortune. All last night and
      this morning I have been haunted by the trio ‘Lord, have Mercy’
      that we sang at the wedding at Marionovsky’s. It’s in my head
      and in my throat. It seems as though I could sing it, but I can’t; I
      have no voice.”
    

      He paused for a minute, thinking, then went on:
    

      “For fifteen years I was in the choir. In all the Lugansky works
      there was, maybe, no one with a voice like mine. But, confound it, I
      bathed two years ago in the Donets, and I can’t get a single note
      true ever since. I took cold in my throat. And without a voice I am like a
      workman without hands.”
    

      “That’s true,” Panteley agreed.
    

      “I think of myself as a ruined man and nothing more.”
    

      At that moment Vassya chanced to catch sight of Yegorushka. His eyes grew
      moist and smaller than ever.
    

      “There’s a little gentleman driving with us,” and he
      covered his nose with his sleeve as though he were bashful. “What a
      grand driver! Stay with us and you shall drive the waggons and sell wool.”
    

      The incongruity of one person being at once a little gentleman and a
      waggon driver seemed to strike him as very queer and funny, for he burst
      into a loud guffaw, and went on enlarging upon the idea. Emelyan glanced
      upwards at Yegorushka, too, but coldly and cursorily. He was absorbed in
      his own thoughts, and had it not been for Vassya, would not have noticed
      Yegorushka’s presence. Before five minutes had passed he was waving
      his arms again, then describing to his companions the beauties of the
      wedding anthem, “Lord, have Mercy,” which he had remembered in
      the night. He put the whip under his arm and waved both hands.
    

      A mile from the village the waggons stopped by a well with a crane.
      Letting his pail down into the well, black-bearded Kiruha lay on his
      stomach on the framework and thrust his shaggy head, his shoulders, and
      part of his chest into the black hole, so that Yegorushka could see
      nothing but his short legs, which scarcely touched the ground. Seeing the
      reflection of his head far down at the bottom of the well, he was
      delighted and went off into his deep bass stupid laugh, and the echo from
      the well answered him. When he got up his neck and face were as red as
      beetroot. The first to run up and drink was Dymov. He drank laughing,
      often turning from the pail to tell Kiruha something funny, then he turned
      round, and uttered aloud, to be heard all over the steppe, five very bad
      words. Yegorushka did not understand the meaning of such words, but he
      knew very well they were bad words. He knew the repulsion his friends and
      relations silently felt for such words. He himself, without knowing why,
      shared that feeling and was accustomed to think that only drunk and
      disorderly people enjoy the privilege of uttering such words aloud. He
      remembered the murder of the grass snake, listened to Dymov’s
      laughter, and felt something like hatred for the man. And as ill-luck
      would have it, Dymov at that moment caught sight of Yegorushka, who had
      climbed down from the waggon and gone up to the well. He laughed aloud and
      shouted:
    

      “I say, lads, the old man has been brought to bed of a boy in the
      night!”
    

      Kiruha laughed his bass laugh till he coughed. Someone else laughed too,
      while Yegorushka crimsoned and made up his mind finally that Dymov was a
      very wicked man.
    

      With his curly flaxen head, with his shirt opened on his chest and no hat
      on, Dymov looked handsome and exceptionally strong; in every movement he
      made one could see the reckless dare-devil and athlete, knowing his value.
      He shrugged his shoulders, put his arms akimbo, talked and laughed louder
      than any of the rest, and looked as though he were going to lift up
      something very heavy with one hand and astonish the whole world by doing
      so. His mischievous mocking eyes glided over the road, the waggons, and
      the sky without resting on anything, and seemed looking for someone to
      kill, just as a pastime, and something to laugh at. Evidently he was
      afraid of no one, would stick at nothing, and most likely was not in the
      least interested in Yegorushka’s opinion of him. . . . Yegorushka
      meanwhile hated his flaxen head, his clear face, and his strength with his
      whole heart, listened with fear and loathing to his laughter, and kept
      thinking what word of abuse he could pay him out with.
    

      Panteley, too, went up to the pail. He took out of his pocket a little
      green glass of an ikon lamp, wiped it with a rag, filled it from the pail
      and drank from it, then filled it again, wrapped the little glass in the
      rag, and then put it back into his pocket.
    

      “Grandfather, why do you drink out of a lamp?” Yegorushka
      asked him, surprised.
    

      “One man drinks out of a pail and another out of a lamp,” the
      old man answered evasively. “Every man to his own taste. . . . You
      drink out of the pail—well, drink, and may it do you good. . . .”
    

      “You darling, you beauty!” Vassya said suddenly, in a
      caressing, plaintive voice. “You darling!”
    

      His eyes were fixed on the distance; they were moist and smiling, and his
      face wore the same expression as when he had looked at Yegorushka.
    

      “Who is it you are talking to?” asked Kiruha.
    

      “A darling fox, . . . lying on her back, playing like a dog.”
    

      Everyone began staring into the distance, looking for the fox, but no one
      could see it, only Vassya with his grey muddy-looking eyes, and he was
      enchanted by it. His sight was extraordinarily keen, as Yegorushka learnt
      afterwards. He was so long-sighted that the brown steppe was for him
      always full of life and interest. He had only to look into the distance to
      see a fox, a hare, a bustard, or some other animal keeping at a distance
      from men. There was nothing strange in seeing a hare running away or a
      flying bustard—everyone crossing the steppes could see them; but it
      was not vouchsafed to everyone to see wild animals in their own haunts
      when they were not running nor hiding, nor looking about them in alarm.
      Yet Vassya saw foxes playing, hares washing themselves with their paws,
      bustards preening their wings and hammering out their hollow nests. Thanks
      to this keenness of sight, Vassya had, besides the world seen by everyone,
      another world of his own, accessible to no one else, and probably a very
      beautiful one, for when he saw something and was in raptures over it it
      was impossible not to envy him.
    

      When the waggons set off again, the church bells were ringing for service.
    

      V
    

      The train of waggons drew up on the bank of a river on one side of a
      village. The sun was blazing, as it had been the day before; the air was
      stagnant and depressing. There were a few willows on the bank, but the
      shade from them did not fall on the earth, but on the water, where it was
      wasted; even in the shade under the waggon it was stifling and wearisome.
      The water, blue from the reflection of the sky in it, was alluring.
    

      Styopka, a waggoner whom Yegorushka noticed now for the first time, a
      Little Russian lad of eighteen, in a long shirt without a belt, and full
      trousers that flapped like flags as he walked, undressed quickly, ran
      along the steep bank and plunged into the water. He dived three times,
      then swam on his back and shut his eyes in his delight. His face was
      smiling and wrinkled up as though he were being tickled, hurt and amused.
    

      On a hot day when there is nowhere to escape from the sultry, stifling
      heat, the splash of water and the loud breathing of a man bathing sounds
      like good music to the ear. Dymov and Kiruha, looking at Styopka,
      undressed quickly and one after the other, laughing loudly in eager
      anticipation of their enjoyment, dropped into the water, and the quiet,
      modest little river resounded with snorting and splashing and shouting.
      Kiruha coughed, laughed and shouted as though they were trying to drown
      him, while Dymov chased him and tried to catch him by the leg.
    

      “Ha-ha-ha!” he shouted. “Catch him! Hold him!”
    

      Kiruha laughed and enjoyed himself, but his expression was the same as it
      had been on dry land, stupid, with a look of astonishment on it as though
      someone had, unnoticed, stolen up behind him and hit him on the head with
      the butt-end of an axe. Yegorushka undressed, too, but did not let himself
      down by the bank, but took a run and a flying leap from the height of
      about ten feet. Describing an arc in the air, he fell into the water, sank
      deep, but did not reach the bottom; some force, cold and pleasant to the
      touch, seemed to hold him up and bring him back to the surface. He popped
      out and, snorting and blowing bubbles, opened his eyes; but the sun was
      reflected in the water quite close to his face. At first blinding spots of
      light, then rainbow colours and dark patches, flitted before his eyes. He
      made haste to dive again, opened his eyes in the water and saw something
      cloudy-green like a sky on a moonlight night. Again the same force would
      not let him touch the bottom and stay in the coolness, but lifted him to
      the surface. He popped out and heaved a sigh so deep that he had a feeling
      of space and freshness, not only in his chest, but in his stomach. Then,
      to get from the water everything he possibly could get, he allowed himself
      every luxury; he lay on his back and basked, splashed, frolicked, swam on
      his face, on his side, on his back and standing up—just as he
      pleased till he was exhausted. The other bank was thickly overgrown with
      reeds; it was golden in the sun, and the flowers of the reeds hung
      drooping to the water in lovely tassels. In one place the reeds were
      shaking and nodding, with their flowers rustling— Styopka and Kiruha
      were hunting crayfish.
    

      “A crayfish, look, lads! A crayfish!” Kiruha cried
      triumphantly and actually showed a crayfish.
    

      Yegorushka swam up to the reeds, dived, and began fumbling among their
      roots. Burrowing in the slimy, liquid mud, he felt something sharp and
      unpleasant—perhaps it really was a crayfish. But at that minute
      someone seized him by the leg and pulled him to the surface. Spluttering
      and coughing, Yegorushka opened his eyes and saw before him the wet
      grinning face of the dare-devil Dymov. The impudent fellow was breathing
      hard, and from a look in his eyes he seemed inclined for further mischief.
      He held Yegorushka tight by the leg, and was lifting his hand to take hold
      of his neck. But Yegorushka tore himself away with repulsion and terror,
      as though disgusted at being touched and afraid that the bully would drown
      him, and said:
    

      “Fool! I’ll punch you in the face.”
    

      Feeling that this was not sufficient to express his hatred, he thought a
      minute and added:
    

      “You blackguard! You son of a bitch!”
    

      But Dymov, as though nothing were the matter, took no further notice of
      Yegorushka, but swam off to Kiruha, shouting:
    

      “Ha-ha-ha! Let us catch fish! Mates, let us catch fish.”
    

      “To be sure,” Kiruha agreed; “there must be a lot of
      fish here.”
    

      “Styopka, run to the village and ask the peasants for a net!
    

      “They won’t give it to me.”
    

      “They will, you ask them. Tell them that they should give it to us
      for Christ’s sake, because we are just the same as pilgrims.”
    

      “That’s true.”
    

      Styopka clambered out of the water, dressed quickly, and without a cap on
      he ran, his full trousers flapping, to the village. The water lost all its
      charm for Yegorushka after his encounter with Dymov. He got out and began
      dressing. Panteley and Vassya were sitting on the steep bank, with their
      legs hanging down, looking at the bathers. Emelyan was standing naked, up
      to his knees in the water, holding on to the grass with one hand to
      prevent himself from falling while the other stroked his body. With his
      bony shoulder-blades, with the swelling under his eye, bending down and
      evidently afraid of the water, he made a ludicrous figure. His face was
      grave and severe. He looked angrily at the water, as though he were just
      going to upbraid it for having given him cold in the Donets and robbed him
      of his voice.
    

      “And why don’t you bathe?” Yegorushka asked Vassya.
    

      “Oh, I don’t care for it, . . .” answered Vassya.
    

      “How is it your chin is swollen?”
    

      “It’s bad. . . . I used to work at the match factory, little
      sir. . . . The doctor used to say that it would make my jaw rot. The air
      is not healthy there. There were three chaps beside me who had their jaws
      swollen, and with one of them it rotted away altogether.”
    

      Styopka soon came back with the net. Dymov and Kiruha were already turning
      blue and getting hoarse by being so long in the water, but they set about
      fishing eagerly. First they went to a deep place beside the reeds; there
      Dymov was up to his neck, while the water went over squat Kiruha’s
      head. The latter spluttered and blew bubbles, while Dymov stumbling on the
      prickly roots, fell over and got caught in the net; both flopped about in
      the water, and made a noise, and nothing but mischief came of their
      fishing.
    

      “It’s deep,” croaked Kiruha. “You won’t
      catch anything.”
    

      “Don’t tug, you devil!” shouted Dymov trying to put the
      net in the proper position. “Hold it up.”
    

      “You won’t catch anything here,” Panteley shouted from
      the bank. “You are only frightening the fish, you stupids! Go more
      to the left! It’s shallower there!”
    

      Once a big fish gleamed above the net; they all drew a breath, and Dymov
      struck the place where it had vanished with his fist, and his face
      expressed vexation.
    

      “Ugh!” cried Panteley, and he stamped his foot. “You’ve
      let the perch slip! It’s gone!”
    

      Moving more to the left, Dymov and Kiruha picked out a shallower place,
      and then fishing began in earnest. They had wandered off some hundred
      paces from the waggons; they could be seen silently trying to go as deep
      as they could and as near the reeds, moving their legs a little at a time,
      drawing out the nets, beating the water with their fists to drive them
      towards the nets. From the reeds they got to the further bank; they drew
      the net out, then, with a disappointed air, lifting their knees high as
      they walked, went back into the reeds. They were talking about something,
      but what it was no one could hear. The sun was scorching their backs, the
      flies were stinging them, and their bodies had turned from purple to
      crimson. Styopka was walking after them with a pail in his hands; he had
      tucked his shirt right up under his armpits, and was holding it up by the
      hem with his teeth. After every successful catch he lifted up some fish,
      and letting it shine in the sun, shouted:
    

      “Look at this perch! We’ve five like that!”
    

      Every time Dymov, Kiruha and Styopka pulled out the net they could be seen
      fumbling about in the mud in it, putting some things into the pail and
      throwing other things away; sometimes they passed something that was in
      the net from hand to hand, examined it inquisitively, then threw that,
      too, away.
    

      “What is it?” they shouted to them from the bank.
    

      Styopka made some answer, but it was hard to make out his words. Then he
      climbed out of the water and, holding the pail in both hands, forgetting
      to let his shirt drop, ran to the waggons.
    

      “It’s full!” he shouted, breathing hard. “Give us
      another!”
    

      Yegorushka looked into the pail: it was full. A young pike poked its ugly
      nose out of the water, and there were swarms of crayfish and little fish
      round about it. Yegorushka put his hand down to the bottom and stirred up
      the water; the pike vanished under the crayfish and a perch and a tench
      swam to the surface instead of it. Vassya, too, looked into the pail. His
      eyes grew moist and his face looked as caressing as before when he saw the
      fox. He took something out of the pail, put it to his mouth and began
      chewing it.
    

      “Mates,” said Styopka in amazement, “Vassya is eating a
      live gudgeon! Phoo!”
    

      “It’s not a gudgeon, but a minnow,” Vassya answered
      calmly, still munching.
    

      He took a fish’s tail out of his mouth, looked at it caressingly,
      and put it back again. While he was chewing and crunching with his teeth
      it seemed to Yegorushka that he saw before him something not human. Vassya’s
      swollen chin, his lustreless eyes, his extraordinary sharp sight, the fish’s
      tail in his mouth, and the caressing friendliness with which he crunched
      the gudgeon made him like an animal.
    

      Yegorushka felt dreary beside him. And the fishing was over, too. He
      walked about beside the waggons, thought a little, and, feeling bored,
      strolled off to the village.
    

      Not long afterwards he was standing in the church, and with his forehead
      leaning on somebody’s back, listened to the singing of the choir.
      The service was drawing to a close. Yegorushka did not understand church
      singing and did not care for it. He listened a little, yawned, and began
      looking at the backs and heads before him. In one head, red and wet from
      his recent bathe, he recognized Emelyan. The back of his head had been
      cropped in a straight line higher than is usual; the hair in front had
      been cut unbecomingly high, and Emelyan’s ears stood out like two
      dock leaves, and seemed to feel themselves out of place. Looking at the
      back of his head and his ears, Yegorushka, for some reason, thought that
      Emelyan was probably very unhappy. He remembered the way he conducted with
      his hands, his husky voice, his timid air when he was bathing, and felt
      intense pity for him. He longed to say something friendly to him.
    

      “I am here, too,” he said, putting out his hand.
    

      People who sing tenor or bass in the choir, especially those who have at
      any time in their lives conducted, are accustomed to look with a stern and
      unfriendly air at boys. They do not give up this habit, even when they
      leave off being in a choir. Turning to Yegorushka, Emelyan looked at him
      from under his brows and said:
    

      “Don’t play in church!”
    

      Then Yegorushka moved forwards nearer to the ikon-stand. Here he saw
      interesting people. On the right side, in front of everyone, a lady and a
      gentleman were standing on a carpet. There were chairs behind them. The
      gentleman was wearing newly ironed shantung trousers; he stood as
      motionless as a soldier saluting, and held high his bluish shaven chin.
      There was a very great air of dignity in his stand-up collar, in his blue
      chin, in his small bald patch and his cane. His neck was so strained from
      excess of dignity, and his chin was drawn up so tensely, that it looked as
      though his head were ready to fly off and soar upwards any minute. The
      lady, who was stout and elderly and wore a white silk shawl, held her head
      on one side and looked as though she had done someone a favour, and wanted
      to say: “Oh, don’t trouble yourself to thank me; I don’t
      like it . . . .” A thick wall of Little Russian heads stood all
      round the carpet.
    

      Yegorushka went up to the ikon-stand and began kissing the local ikons.
      Before each image he slowly bowed down to the ground, without getting up,
      looked round at the congregation, then got up and kissed the ikon. The
      contact of his forehead with the cold floor afforded him great
      satisfaction. When the beadle came from the altar with a pair of long
      snuffers to put out the candles, Yegorushka jumped up quickly from the
      floor and ran up to him.
    

      “Have they given out the holy bread?” he asked.
    

      “There is none; there is none,” the beadle muttered gruffly.
      “It is no use your. . .”
    

      The service was over; Yegorushka walked out of the church in a leisurely
      way, and began strolling about the market-place. He had seen a good many
      villages, market-places, and peasants in his time, and everything that met
      his eyes was entirely without interest for him. At a loss for something to
      do, he went into a shop over the door of which hung a wide strip of red
      cotton. The shop consisted of two roomy, badly lighted parts; in one half
      they sold drapery and groceries, in the other there were tubs of tar, and
      there were horse-collars hanging from the ceiling; from both came the
      savoury smell of leather and tar. The floor of the shop had been watered;
      the man who watered it must have been a very whimsical and original
      person, for it was sprinkled in patterns and mysterious symbols. The
      shopkeeper, an overfed-looking man with a broad face and round beard,
      apparently a Great Russian, was standing, leaning his person over the
      counter. He was nibbling a piece of sugar as he drank his tea, and heaved
      a deep sigh at every sip. His face expressed complete indifference, but
      each sigh seemed to be saying:
    

      “Just wait a minute; I will give it you.”
    

      “Give me a farthing’s worth of sunflower seeds,”
      Yegorushka said, addressing him.
    

      The shopkeeper raised his eyebrows, came out from behind the counter, and
      poured a farthing’s worth of sunflower seeds into Yegorushka’s
      pocket, using an empty pomatum pot as a measure. Yegorushka did not want
      to go away. He spent a long time in examining the box of cakes, thought a
      little and asked, pointing to some little cakes covered with the mildew of
      age:
    

      “How much are these cakes?”
    

      “Two for a farthing.”
    

      Yegorushka took out of his pocket the cake given him the day before by the
      Jewess, and asked him:
    

      “And how much do you charge for cakes like this?”
    

      The shopman took the cake in his hands, looked at it from all sides, and
      raised one eyebrow.
    

      “Like that?” he asked.
    

      Then he raised the other eyebrow, thought a minute, and answered:
    

      “Two for three farthings. . . .”
    

      A silence followed.
    

      “Whose boy are you?” the shopman asked, pouring himself out
      some tea from a red copper teapot.
    

      “The nephew of Ivan Ivanitch.”
    

      “There are all sorts of Ivan Ivanitchs,” the shopkeeper
      sighed. He looked over Yegorushka’s head towards the door, paused a
      minute and asked:
    

      “Would you like some tea?”
    

      “Please. . . .” Yegorushka assented not very readily, though
      he felt an intense longing for his usual morning tea.
    

      The shopkeeper poured him out a glass and gave him with it a bit of sugar
      that looked as though it had been nibbled. Yegorushka sat down on the
      folding chair and began drinking it. He wanted to ask the price of a pound
      of sugar almonds, and had just broached the subject when a customer walked
      in, and the shopkeeper, leaving his glass of tea, attended to his
      business. He led the customer into the other half, where there was a smell
      of tar, and was there a long time discussing something with him. The
      customer, a man apparently very obstinate and pig-headed, was continually
      shaking his head to signify his disapproval, and retreating towards the
      door. The shopkeeper tried to persuade him of something and began pouring
      some oats into a big sack for him.
    

      “Do you call those oats?” the customer said gloomily. “Those
      are not oats, but chaff. It’s a mockery to give that to the hens;
      enough to make the hens laugh. . . . No, I will go to Bondarenko.”
    

      When Yegorushka went back to the river a small camp fire was smoking on
      the bank. The waggoners were cooking their dinner. Styopka was standing in
      the smoke, stirring the cauldron with a big notched spoon. A little on one
      side Kiruha and Vassya, with eyes reddened from the smoke, were sitting
      cleaning the fish. Before them lay the net covered with slime and water
      weeds, and on it lay gleaming fish and crawling crayfish.
    

      Emelyan, who had not long been back from the church, was sitting beside
      Panteley, waving his arm and humming just audibly in a husky voice:
      “To Thee we sing. . . .” Dymov was moving about by the horses.
    

      When they had finished cleaning them, Kiruha and Vassya put the fish and
      the living crayfish together in the pail, rinsed them, and from the pail
      poured them all into the boiling water.
    

      “Shall I put in some fat?” asked Styopka, skimming off the
      froth.
    

      “No need. The fish will make its own gravy,” answered Kiruha.
    

      Before taking the cauldron off the fire Styopka scattered into the water
      three big handfuls of millet and a spoonful of salt; finally he tried it,
      smacked his lips, licked the spoon, and gave a self-satisfied grunt, which
      meant that the grain was done.
    

      All except Panteley sat down near the cauldron and set to work with their
      spoons.
    

      “You there! Give the little lad a spoon!” Panteley observed
      sternly. “I dare say he is hungry too!”
    

      “Ours is peasant fare,” sighed Kiruha.
    

      “Peasant fare is welcome, too, when one is hungry.”
    

      They gave Yegorushka a spoon. He began eating, not sitting, but standing
      close to the cauldron and looking down into it as in a hole. The grain
      smelt of fish and fish-scales were mixed up with the millet. The crayfish
      could not be hooked out with a spoon, and the men simply picked them out
      of the cauldron with their hands; Vassya did so particularly freely, and
      wetted his sleeves as well as his hands in the mess. But yet the stew
      seemed to Yegorushka very nice, and reminded him of the crayfish soup
      which his mother used to make at home on fast-days. Panteley was sitting
      apart munching bread.
    

      “Grandfather, why aren’t you eating?” Emelyan asked him.
    

      “I don’t eat crayfish. . . . Nasty things,” the old man
      said, and turned away with disgust.
    

      While they were eating they all talked. From this conversation Yegorushka
      gathered that all his new acquaintances, in spite of the differences of
      their ages and their characters, had one point in common which made them
      all alike: they were all people with a splendid past and a very poor
      present. Of their past they all— every one of them—spoke with
      enthusiasm; their attitude to the present was almost one of contempt. The
      Russian loves recalling life, but he does not love living. Yegorushka did
      not yet know that, and before the stew had been all eaten he firmly
      believed that the men sitting round the cauldron were the injured victims
      of fate. Panteley told them that in the past, before there were railways,
      he used to go with trains of waggons to Moscow and to Nizhni, and used to
      earn so much that he did not know what to do with his money; and what
      merchants there used to be in those days! what fish! how cheap everything
      was! Now the roads were shorter, the merchants were stingier, the peasants
      were poorer, the bread was dearer, everything had shrunk and was on a
      smaller scale. Emelyan told them that in old days he had been in the choir
      in the Lugansky works, and that he had a remarkable voice and read music
      splendidly, while now he had become a peasant and lived on the charity of
      his brother, who sent him out with his horses and took half his earnings.
      Vassya had once worked in a match factory; Kiruha had been a coachman in a
      good family, and had been reckoned the smartest driver of a three-in-hand
      in the whole district. Dymov, the son of a well-to-do peasant, lived at
      ease, enjoyed himself and had known no trouble till he was twenty, when
      his stern harsh father, anxious to train him to work, and afraid he would
      be spoiled at home, had sent him to a carrier’s to work as a hired
      labourer. Styopka was the only one who said nothing, but from his
      beardless face it was evident that his life had been a much better one in
      the past.
    

      Thinking of his father, Dymov frowned and left off eating. Sullenly from
      under his brows he looked round at his companions and his eye rested upon
      Yegorushka.
    

      “You heathen, take off your cap,” he said rudely. “You
      can’t eat with your cap on, and you a gentleman too!”
    

      Yegorushka took off his hat and did not say a word, but the stew lost all
      savour for him, and he did not hear Panteley and Vassya intervening on his
      behalf. A feeling of anger with the insulting fellow was rankling
      oppressively in his breast, and he made up his mind that he would do him
      some injury, whatever it cost him.
    

      After dinner everyone sauntered to the waggons and lay down in the shade.
    

      “Are we going to start soon, grandfather?” Yegorushka asked
      Panteley.
    

      “In God’s good time we shall set off. There’s no
      starting yet; it is too hot. . . . O Lord, Thy will be done. Holy Mother.
      . . Lie down, little lad.”
    

      Soon there was a sound of snoring from under the waggons. Yegorushka meant
      to go back to the village, but on consideration, yawned and lay down by
      the old man.
    

      VI
    

      The waggons remained by the river the whole day, and set off again when
      the sun was setting.
    

      Yegorushka was lying on the bales again; the waggon creaked softly and
      swayed from side to side. Panteley walked below, stamping his feet,
      slapping himself on his thighs and muttering. The air was full of the
      churring music of the steppes, as it had been the day before.
    

      Yegorushka lay on his back, and, putting his hands under his head, gazed
      upwards at the sky. He watched the glow of sunset kindle, then fade away;
      guardian angels covering the horizon with their gold wings disposed
      themselves to slumber. The day had passed peacefully; the quiet peaceful
      night had come, and they could stay tranquilly at home in heaven. . . .
      Yegorushka saw the sky by degrees grow dark and the mist fall over the
      earth—saw the stars light up, one after the other. . . .
    

      When you gaze a long while fixedly at the deep sky thoughts and feelings
      for some reason merge in a sense of loneliness. One begins to feel
      hopelessly solitary, and everything one used to look upon as near and akin
      becomes infinitely remote and valueless; the stars that have looked down
      from the sky thousands of years already, the mists and the
      incomprehensible sky itself, indifferent to the brief life of man, oppress
      the soul with their silence when one is left face to face with them and
      tries to grasp their significance. One is reminded of the solitude
      awaiting each one of us in the grave, and the reality of life seems awful
      . . . full of despair. . . .
    

      Yegorushka thought of his grandmother, who was sleeping now under the
      cherry-trees in the cemetery. He remembered how she lay in her coffin with
      pennies on her eyes, how afterwards she was shut in and let down into the
      grave; he even recalled the hollow sound of the clods of earth on the
      coffin lid. . . . He pictured his granny in the dark and narrow coffin,
      helpless and deserted by everyone. His imagination pictured his granny
      suddenly awakening, not understanding where she was, knocking upon the lid
      and calling for help, and in the end swooning with horror and dying again.
      He imagined his mother dead, Father Christopher, Countess Dranitsky,
      Solomon. But however much he tried to imagine himself in the dark tomb,
      far from home, outcast, helpless and dead, he could not succeed; for
      himself personally he could not admit the possibility of death, and felt
      that he would never die. . . .
    

      Panteley, for whom death could not be far away, walked below and went on
      reckoning up his thoughts.
    

      “All right. . . . Nice gentlefolk, . . .” he muttered. “Took
      his little lad to school—but how he is doing now I haven’t
      heard say —in Slavyanoserbsk. I say there is no establishment for
      teaching them to be very clever. . . . No, that’s true—a nice
      little lad, no harm in him. . . . He’ll grow up and be a help to his
      father . . . . You, Yegory, are little now, but you’ll grow big and
      will keep your father and mother. . . . So it is ordained of God, ‘Honour
      your father and your mother.’ . . . I had children myself, but they
      were burnt. . . . My wife was burnt and my children, . . . that’s
      true. . . . The hut caught fire on the night of Epiphany. . . . I was not
      at home, I was driving in Oryol. In Oryol. . . . Marya dashed out into the
      street, but remembering that the children were asleep in the hut, ran back
      and was burnt with her children. . . . Next day they found nothing but
      bones.”
    

      About midnight Yegorushka and the waggoners were again sitting round a
      small camp fire. While the dry twigs and stems were burning up, Kiruha and
      Vassya went off somewhere to get water from a creek; they vanished into
      the darkness, but could be heard all the time talking and cElinking their
      pails; so the creek was not far away. The light from the fire lay a great
      flickering patch on the earth; though the moon was bright, yet everything
      seemed impenetrably black beyond that red patch. The light was in the
      waggoners’ eyes, and they saw only part of the great road; almost
      unseen in the darkness the waggons with the bales and the horses looked
      like a mountain of undefined shape. Twenty paces from the camp fire at the
      edge of the road stood a wooden cross that had fallen aslant. Before the
      camp fire had been lighted, when he could still see things at a distance,
      Yegorushka had noticed that there was a similar old slanting cross on the
      other side of the great road.
    

      Coming back with the water, Kiruha and Vassya filled the cauldron and
      fixed it over the fire. Styopka, with the notched spoon in his hand, took
      his place in the smoke by the cauldron, gazing dreamily into the water for
      the scum to rise. Panteley and Emelyan were sitting side by side in
      silence, brooding over something. Dymov was lying on his stomach, with his
      head propped on his fists, looking into the fire. . . . Styopka’s
      shadow was dancing over him, so that his handsome face was at one minute
      covered with darkness, at the next lighted up. . . . Kiruha and Vassya
      were wandering about at a little distance gathering dry grass and bark for
      the fire. Yegorushka, with his hands in his pockets, was standing by
      Panteley, watching how the fire devoured the grass.
    

      All were resting, musing on something, and they glanced cursorily at the
      cross over which patches of red light were dancing. There is something
      melancholy, pensive, and extremely poetical about a solitary tomb; one
      feels its silence, and the silence gives one the sense of the presence of
      the soul of the unknown man who lies under the cross. Is that soul at
      peace on the steppe? Does it grieve in the moonlight? Near the tomb the
      steppe seems melancholy, dreary and mournful; the grass seems more
      sorrowful, and one fancies the grasshoppers chirrup less freely, and there
      is no passer-by who would not remember that lonely soul and keep looking
      back at the tomb, till it was left far behind and hidden in the mists. . .
      .
    

      “Grandfather, what is that cross for?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      Panteley looked at the cross and then at Dymov and asked:
    

      “Nikola, isn’t this the place where the mowers killed the
      merchants?”
    

      Dymov not very readily raised himself on his elbow, looked at the road and
      said:
    

      “Yes, it is. . . .”
    

      A silence followed. Kiruha broke up some dry stalks, crushed them up
      together and thrust them under the cauldron. The fire flared up brightly;
      Styopka was enveloped in black smoke, and the shadow cast by the cross
      danced along the road in the dusk beside the waggons.
    

      “Yes, they were killed,” Dymov said reluctantly. “Two
      merchants, father and son, were travelling, selling holy images. They put
      up in the inn not far from here that is now kept by Ignat Fomin. The old
      man had a drop too much, and began boasting that he had a lot of money
      with him. We all know merchants are a boastful set, God preserve us. . . .
      They can’t resist showing off before the likes of us. And at the
      time some mowers were staying the night at the inn. So they overheard what
      the merchants said and took note of it.”
    

      “O Lord! . . . Holy Mother!” sighed Panteley.
    

      “Next day, as soon as it was light,” Dymov went on, “the
      merchants were preparing to set off and the mowers tried to join them.
      ‘Let us go together, your worships. It will be more cheerful and
      there will be less danger, for this is an out-of-the-way place. . . .’
      The merchants had to travel at a walking pace to avoid breaking the
      images, and that just suited the mowers. . . .”
    

      Dymov rose into a kneeling position and stretched.
    

      “Yes,” he went on, yawning. “Everything went all right
      till they reached this spot, and then the mowers let fly at them with
      their scythes. The son, he was a fine young fellow, snatched the scythe
      from one of them, and he used it, too. . . . Well, of course, they got the
      best of it because there were eight of them. They hacked at the merchants
      so that there was not a sound place left on their bodies; when they had
      finished they dragged both of them off the road, the father to one side
      and the son to the other. Opposite that cross there is another cross on
      this side. . . . Whether it is still standing, I don’t know. . . . I
      can’t see from here. . . .”
    

      “It is,” said Kiruha.
    

      “They say they did not find much money afterwards.”
    

      “No,” Panteley confirmed; “they only found a hundred
      roubles.”
    

      “And three of them died afterwards, for the merchant had cut them
      badly with the scythe, too. They died from loss of blood. One had his hand
      cut off, so that they say he ran three miles without his hand, and they
      found him on a mound close to Kurikovo. He was squatting on his heels,
      with his head on his knees, as though he were lost in thought, but when
      they looked at him there was no life in him and he was dead. . . .”
    

      “They found him by the track of blood,” said Panteley.
    

      Everyone looked at the cross, and again there was a hush. From somewhere,
      most likely from the creek, floated the mournful cry of the bird: “Sleep!
      sleep! sleep!”
    

      “There are a great many wicked people in the world,” said
      Emelyan.
    

      “A great many,” assented Panteley, and he moved up closer to
      the fire as though he were frightened. “A great many,” he went
      on in a low voice. “I’ve seen lots and lots of them. . . .
      Wicked people! . . . I have seen a great many holy and just, too. . . .
      Queen of Heaven, save us and have mercy on us. I remember once thirty
      years ago, or maybe more, I was driving a merchant from Morshansk. The
      merchant was a jolly handsome fellow, with money, too . . . the merchant
      was . . . a nice man, no harm in him. . . . So we put up for the night at
      an inn. And in Russia the inns are not what they are in these parts. There
      the yards are roofed in and look like the ground floor, or let us say like
      barns in good farms. Only a barn would be a bit higher. So we put up there
      and were all right. My merchant was in a room, while I was with the
      horses, and everything was as it should be. So, lads, I said my prayers
      before going to sleep and began walking about the yard. And it was a dark
      night, I couldn’t see anything; it was no good trying. So I walked
      about a bit up to the waggons, or nearly, when I saw a light gleaming.
      What could it mean? I thought the people of the inn had gone to bed long
      ago, and besides the merchant and me there were no other guests in the
      inn. . . . Where could the light have come from? I felt suspicious. . . .
      I went closer . . . towards the light. . . . The Lord have mercy upon me!
      and save me, Queen of Heaven! I looked and there was a little window with
      a grating, . . . close to the ground, in the house. . . I lay down on the
      ground and looked in; as soon as I looked in a cold chill ran all down me.
      . . .”
    

      Kiruha, trying not to make a noise, thrust a handful of twigs into the
      fire. After waiting for it to leave off crackling and hissing, the old man
      went on:
    

      “I looked in and there was a big cellar, black and dark. . . . There
      was a lighted lantern on a tub. In the middle of the cellar were about a
      dozen men in red shirts with their sleeves turned up, sharpening long
      knives. . . . Ugh! So we had fallen into a nest of robbers. . . . What’s
      to be done? I ran to the merchant, waked him up quietly, and said: ‘Don’t
      be frightened, merchant,’ said I, ‘but we are in a bad way. We
      have fallen into a nest of robbers,’ I said. He turned pale and
      asked: ‘What are we to do now, Panteley? I have a lot of money that
      belongs to orphans. As for my life,’ he said, ‘that’s in
      God’s hands. I am not afraid to die, but it’s dreadful to lose
      the orphans’ money,’ said he. . . . What were we to do? The
      gates were locked; there was no getting out. If there had been a fence one
      could have climbed over it, but with the yard shut up! . . . ‘Come,
      don’t be frightened, merchant,’ said I; ‘but pray to
      God. Maybe the Lord will not let the orphans suffer. Stay still.’
      said I, ‘and make no sign, and meanwhile, maybe, I shall think of
      something. . . .’ Right! . . . I prayed to God and the Lord put the
      thought into my mind. . . . I clambered up on my chaise and softly, . . .
      softly so that no one should hear, began pulling out the straw in the
      thatch, made a hole and crept out, crept out. . . . Then I jumped off the
      roof and ran along the road as fast as I could. I ran and ran till I was
      nearly dead. . . . I ran maybe four miles without taking breath, if not
      more. Thank God I saw a village. I ran up to a hut and began tapping at a
      window. ‘Good Christian people,’ I said, and told them all
      about it, ‘do not let a Christian soul perish. . . .’ I waked
      them all up. . . . The peasants gathered together and went with me, . .
      one with a cord, one with an oakstick, others with pitchforks. . . . We
      broke in the gates of the inn-yard and went straight to the cellar. . . .
      And the robbers had just finished sharpening their knives and were going
      to kill the merchant. The peasants took them, every one of them, bound
      them and carried them to the police. The merchant gave them three hundred
      roubles in his joy, and gave me five gold pieces and put my name down.
      They said that they found human bones in the cellar afterwards, heaps and
      heaps of them. . . . Bones! . . . So they robbed people and then buried
      them, so that there should be no traces. . . . Well, afterwards they were
      punished at Morshansk.”
    

      Panteley had finished his story, and he looked round at his listeners.
      They were gazing at him in silence. The water was boiling by now and
      Styopka was skimming off the froth.
    

      “Is the fat ready?” Kiruha asked him in a whisper.
    

      “Wait a little. . . . Directly.”
    

      Styopka, his eyes fixed on Panteley as though he were afraid that the
      latter might begin some story before he was back, ran to the waggons; soon
      he came back with a little wooden bowl and began pounding some lard in it.
    

      “I went another journey with a merchant, too, . . .” Panteley
      went on again, speaking as before in a low voice and with fixed
      unbElinking eyes. “His name, as I remember now, was Pyotr
      Grigoritch. He was a nice man, . . . the merchant was. We stopped in the
      same way at an inn. . . . He indoors and me with the horses. . . . The
      people of the house, the innkeeper and his wife, seemed friendly good sort
      of people; the labourers, too, seemed all right; but yet, lads, I couldn’t
      sleep. I had a queer feeling in my heart, . . . a queer feeling, that was
      just it. The gates were open and there were plenty of people about, and
      yet I felt afraid and not myself. Everyone had been asleep long ago. It
      was the middle of the night; it would soon be time to get up, and I was
      lying alone in my chaise and could not close my eyes, as though I were
      some owl. And then, lads, I heard this sound, ‘Toop! toop! toop!’
      Someone was creeping up to the chaise. I poke my head out, and there was a
      peasant woman in nothing but her shift and with her feet bare. . . .
      ‘What do you want, good woman?’ I asked. And she was all of a
      tremble; her face was terror-stricken. . . ‘Get up, good man,’
      said she; ‘the people are plotting evil. . . . They mean to kill
      your merchant. With my own ears I heard the master whispering with his
      wife. . . .’ So it was not for nothing, the foreboding of my heart!
      ‘And who are you?’ I asked. ‘I am their cook,’ she
      said. . . . Right! . . . So I got out of the chaise and went to the
      merchant. I waked him up and said: ‘Things aren’t quite right,
      Pyotr Grigoritch. . . . Make haste and rouse yourself from sleep, your
      worship, and dress now while there is still time,’ I said; ‘and
      to save our skins, let us get away from trouble.’ He had no sooner
      begun dressing when the door opened and, mercy on us! I saw, Holy Mother!
      the innkeeper and his wife come into the room with three labourers. . . .
      So they had persuaded the labourers to join them. ‘The merchant has
      a lot of money, and we’ll go shares,’ they told them. Every
      one of the five had a long knife in their hand each a knife. The innkeeper
      locked the door and said: ‘Say your prayers, travellers, . . . and
      if you begin screaming,’ they said, ‘we won’t let you
      say your prayers before you die. . . .’ As though we could scream! I
      had such a lump in my throat I could not cry out. . . . The merchant wept
      and said: ‘Good Christian people! you have resolved to kill me
      because my money tempts you. Well, so be it; I shall not be the first nor
      shall I be the last. Many of us merchants have been murdered at inns. But
      why, good Christian brothers,’ says he, ‘murder my driver? Why
      should he have to suffer for my money?’ And he said that so
      pitifully! And the innkeeper answered him: ‘If we leave him alive,’
      said he, ‘he will be the first to bear witness against us. One may
      just as well kill two as one. You can but answer once for seven misdeeds.
      . . Say your prayers, that’s all you can do, and it is no good
      talking!’ The merchant and I knelt down side by side and wept and
      said our prayers. He thought of his children. I was young in those days; I
      wanted to live. . . . We looked at the images and prayed, and so pitifully
      that it brings a tear even now. . . . And the innkeeper’s wife looks
      at us and says: ‘Good people,’ said she, ‘don’t
      bear a grudge against us in the other world and pray to God for our
      punishment, for it is want that drives us to it.’ We prayed and wept
      and prayed and wept, and God heard us. He had pity on us, I suppose. . . .
      At the very minute when the innkeeper had taken the merchant by the beard
      to rip open his throat with his knife suddenly someone seemed to tap at
      the window from the yard! We all started, and the innkeeper’s hands
      dropped. . . . Someone was tapping at the window and shouting: ‘Pyotr
      Grigoritch,’ he shouted, ‘are you here? Get ready and let’s
      go!’ The people saw that someone had come for the merchant; they
      were terrified and took to their heels. . . . And we made haste into the
      yard, harnessed the horses, and were out of sight in a minute. . .”
    

      “Who was it knocked at the window?” asked Dymov.
    

      “At the window? It must have been a holy saint or angel, for there
      was no one else. . . . When we drove out of the yard there wasn’t a
      soul in the street. . . . It was the Lord’s doing.”
    

      Panteley told other stories, and in all of them “long knives”
      figured and all alike sounded made up. Had he heard these stories from
      someone else, or had he made them up himself in the remote past, and
      afterwards, as his memory grew weaker, mixed up his experiences with his
      imaginations and become unable to distinguish one from the other? Anything
      is possible, but it is strange that on this occasion and for the rest of
      the journey, whenever he happened to tell a story, he gave unmistakable
      preference to fiction, and never told of what he really had experienced.
      At the time Yegorushka took it all for the genuine thing, and believed
      every word; later on it seemed to him strange that a man who in his day
      had travelled all over Russia and seen and known so much, whose wife and
      children had been burnt to death, so failed to appreciate the wealth of
      his life that whenever he was sitting by the camp fire he was either
      silent or talked of what had never been.
    

      Over their porridge they were all silent, thinking of what they had just
      heard. Life is terrible and marvellous, and so, however terrible a story
      you tell in Russia, however you embroider it with nests of robbers, long
      knives and such marvels, it always finds an echo of reality in the soul of
      the listener, and only a man who has been a good deal affected by
      education looks askance distrustfully, and even he will be silent. The
      cross by the roadside, the dark bales of wool, the wide expanse of the
      plain, and the lot of the men gathered together by the camp fire—all
      this was of itself so marvellous and terrible that the fantastic colours
      of legend and fairy-tale were pale and blended with life.
    

      All the others ate out of the cauldron, but Panteley sat apart and ate his
      porridge out of a wooden bowl. His spoon was not like those the others
      had, but was made of cypress wood, with a little cross on it. Yegorushka,
      looking at him, thought of the little ikon glass and asked Styopka softly:
    

      “Why does Grandfather sit apart?”
    

      “He is an Old Believer,” Styopka and Vassya answered in a
      whisper. And as they said it they looked as though they were speaking of
      some secret vice or weakness.
    

      All sat silent, thinking. After the terrible stories there was no
      inclination to speak of ordinary things. All at once in the midst of the
      silence Vassya drew himself up and, fixing his lustreless eyes on one
      point, pricked up his ears.
    

      “What is it?” Dymov asked him.
    

      “Someone is coming,” answered Vassya.
    

      “Where do you see him?”
    

      “Yo-on-der! There’s something white. . .”
    

      There was nothing to be seen but darkness in the direction in which Vassya
      was looking; everyone listened, but they could hear no sound of steps.
    

      “Is he coming by the highroad?” asked Dymov.
    

      “No, over the open country. . . . He is coming this way.”
    

      A minute passed in silence.
    

      “And maybe it’s the merchant who was buried here walking over
      the steppe,” said Dymov.
    

      All looked askance at the cross, exchanged glances and suddenly broke into
      a laugh. They felt ashamed of their terror.
    

      “Why should he walk?” asked Panteley. “It’s only
      those walk at night whom the earth will not take to herself. And the
      merchants were all right. . . . The merchants have received the crown of
      martyrs.”
    

      But all at once they heard the sound of steps; someone was coming in
      haste.
    

      “He’s carrying something,” said Vassya.
    

      They could hear the grass rustling and the dry twigs crackling under the
      feet of the approaching wayfarer. But from the glare of the camp fire
      nothing could be seen. At last the steps sounded close by, and someone
      coughed. The flickering light seemed to part; a veil dropped from the
      waggoners’ eyes, and they saw a man facing them.
    

      Whether it was due to the flickering light or because everyone wanted to
      make out the man’s face first of all, it happened, strangely enough,
      that at the first glance at him they all saw, first of all, not his face
      nor his clothes, but his smile. It was an extraordinarily good-natured,
      broad, soft smile, like that of a baby on waking, one of those infectious
      smiles to which it is difficult not to respond by smiling too. The
      stranger, when they did get a good look at him, turned out to be a man of
      thirty, ugly and in no way remarkable. He was a tall Little Russian, with
      a long nose, long arms and long legs; everything about him seemed long
      except his neck, which was so short that it made him seem stooping. He was
      wearing a clean white shirt with an embroidered collar, white trousers,
      and new high boots, and in comparison with the waggoners he looked quite a
      dandy. In his arms he was carrying something big, white, and at the first
      glance strange-looking, and the stock of a gun also peeped out from behind
      his shoulder.
    

      Coming from the darkness into the circle of light, he stopped short as
      though petrified, and for half a minute looked at the waggoners as though
      he would have said: “Just look what a smile I have!”
    

      Then he took a step towards the fire, smiled still more radiantly and
      said:
    

      “Bread and salt, friends!”
    

      “You are very welcome!” Panteley answered for them all.
    

      The stranger put down by the fire what he was carrying in his arms —it
      was a dead bustard—and greeted them once more.
    

      They all went up to the bustard and began examining it.
    

      “A fine big bird; what did you kill it with?” asked Dymov.
    

      “Grape-shot. You can’t get him with small shot, he won’t
      let you get near enough. Buy it, friends! I will let you have it for
      twenty kopecks.”
    

      “What use would it be to us? It’s good roast, but I bet it
      would be tough boiled; you could not get your teeth into it. . . .”
    

      “Oh, what a pity! I would take it to the gentry at the farm; they
      would give me half a rouble for it. But it’s a long way to go—
      twelve miles!”
    

      The stranger sat down, took off his gun and laid it beside him.
    

      He seemed sleepy and languid; he sat smiling, and, screwing up his eyes at
      the firelight, apparently thinking of something very agreeable. They gave
      him a spoon; he began eating.
    

      “Who are you?” Dymov asked him.
    

      The stranger did not hear the question; he made no answer, and did not
      even glance at Dymov. Most likely this smiling man did not taste the
      flavour of the porridge either, for he seemed to eat it mechanically,
      lifting the spoon to his lips sometimes very full and sometimes quite
      empty. He was not drunk, but he seemed to have something nonsensical in
      his head.
    

      “I ask you who you are?” repeated Dymov.
    

      “I?” said the unknown, starting. “Konstantin Zvonik from
      Rovno. It’s three miles from here.”
    

      And anxious to show straight off that he was not quite an ordinary
      peasant, but something better, Konstantin hastened to add:
    

      “We keep bees and fatten pigs.”
    

      “Do you live with your father or in a house of your own?”
    

      “No; now I am living in a house of my own. I have parted. This
      month, just after St. Peter’s Day, I got married. I am a married man
      now! . . . It’s eighteen days since the wedding.”
    

      “That’s a good thing,” said Panteley. “Marriage is
      a good thing . . . . God’s blessing is on it.”
    

      “His young wife sits at home while he rambles about the steppe,”
      laughed Kiruha. “Queer chap!”
    

      As though he had been pinched on the tenderest spot, Konstantin started,
      laughed and flushed crimson.
    

      “But, Lord, she is not at home!” he said quickly, taking the
      spoon out of his mouth and looking round at everyone with an expression of
      delight and wonder. “She is not; she has gone to her mother’s
      for three days! Yes, indeed, she has gone away, and I feel as though I
      were not married. . . .”
    

      Konstantin waved his hand and turned his head; he wanted to go on
      thinking, but the joy which beamed in his face prevented him. As though he
      were not comfortable, he changed his attitude, laughed, and again waved
      his hand. He was ashamed to share his happy thoughts with strangers, but
      at the same time he had an irresistible longing to communicate his joy.
    

      “She has gone to Demidovo to see her mother,” he said,
      blushing and moving his gun. “She’ll be back to-morrow. . . .
      She said she would be back to dinner.”
    

      “And do you miss her?” said Dymov.
    

      “Oh, Lord, yes; I should think so. We have only been married such a
      little while, and she has gone away. . . . Eh! Oh, but she is a tricky
      one, God strike me dead! She is such a fine, splendid girl, such a one for
      laughing and singing, full of life and fire! When she is there your brain
      is in a whirl, and now she is away I wander about the steppe like a fool,
      as though I had lost something. I have been walking since dinner.”
    

      Konstantin rubbed his eyes, looked at the fire and laughed.
    

      “You love her, then, . . .” said Panteley.
    

      “She is so fine and splendid,” Konstantin repeated, not
      hearing him; “such a housewife, clever and sensible. You wouldn’t
      find another like her among simple folk in the whole province. She has
      gone away. . . . But she is missing me, I kno-ow! I know the little
      magpie. She said she would be back to-morrow by dinner-time. . . . And
      just think how queer!” Konstantin almost shouted, speaking a note
      higher and shifting his position. “Now she loves me and is sad
      without me, and yet she would not marry me.”
    

      “But eat,” said Kiruha.
    

      “She would not marry me,” Konstantin went on, not heeding him.
      “I have been struggling with her for three years! I saw her at the
      Kalatchik fair; I fell madly in love with her, was ready to hang myself. .
      . . I live at Rovno, she at Demidovo, more than twenty miles apart, and
      there was nothing I could do. I sent match-makers to her, and all she said
      was: ‘I won’t!’ Ah, the magpie! I sent her one thing and
      another, earrings and cakes, and twenty pounds of honey—but still
      she said: ‘I won’t!’ And there it was. If you come to
      think of it, I was not a match for her! She was young and lovely, full of
      fire, while I am old: I shall soon be thirty, and a regular beauty, too; a
      fine beard like a goat’s, a clear complexion all covered with
      pimples—how could I be compared with her! The only thing to be said
      is that we are well off, but then the Vahramenkys are well off, too. They’ve
      six oxen, and they keep a couple of labourers. I was in love, friends, as
      though I were plague-stricken. I couldn’t sleep or eat; my brain was
      full of thoughts, and in such a maze, Lord preserve us! I longed to see
      her, and she was in Demidovo. What do you think? God be my witness, I am
      not lying, three times a week I walked over there on foot just to have a
      look at her. I gave up my work! I was so frantic that I even wanted to get
      taken on as a labourer in Demidovo, so as to be near her. I was in misery!
      My mother called in a witch a dozen times; my father tried thrashing me.
      For three years I was in this torment, and then I made up my mind. ‘Damn
      my soul!’ I said. ‘I will go to the town and be a cabman. . .
      . It seems it is fated not to be.’ At Easter I went to Demidovo to
      have a last look at her. . . .”
    

      Konstantin threw back his head and went off into a mirthful tinkling
      laugh, as though he had just taken someone in very cleverly.
    

      “I saw her by the river with the lads,” he went on. “I
      was overcome with anger. . . . I called her aside and maybe for a full
      hour I said all manner of things to her. She fell in love with me! For
      three years she did not like me! she fell in love with me for what I said
      to her. . . .”
    

      “What did you say to her?” asked Dymov.
    

      “What did I say? I don’t remember. . . How could one remember?
      My words flowed at the time like water from a tap, without stopping to
      take breath. Ta-ta-ta! And now I can’t utter a word. . . . Well, so
      she married me. . . . She’s gone now to her mother’s, the
      magpie, and while she is away here I wander over the steppe. I can’t
      stay at home. It’s more than I can do!”
    

      Konstantin awkwardly released his feet, on which he was sitting, stretched
      himself on the earth, and propped his head in his fists, then got up and
      sat down again. Everyone by now thoroughly understood that he was in love
      and happy, poignantly happy; his smile, his eyes, and every movement,
      expressed fervent happiness. He could not find a place for himself, and
      did not know what attitude to take to keep himself from being overwhelmed
      by the multitude of his delightful thoughts. Having poured out his soul
      before these strangers, he settled down quietly at last, and, looking at
      the fire, sank into thought.
    

      At the sight of this happy man everyone felt depressed and longed to be
      happy, too. Everyone was dreamy. Dymov got up, walked about softly by the
      fire, and from his walk, from the movement of his shoulder-blades, it
      could be seen that he was weighed down by depression and yearning. He
      stood still for a moment, looked at Konstantin and sat down.
    

      The camp fire had died down by now; there was no flicker, and the patch of
      red had grown small and dim. . . . And as the fire went out the moonlight
      grew clearer and clearer. Now they could see the full width of the road,
      the bales of wool, the shafts of the waggons, the munching horses; on the
      further side of the road there was the dim outline of the second cross. .
      . .
    

      Dymov leaned his cheek on his hand and softly hummed some plaintive song.
      Konstantin smiled drowsily and chimed in with a thin voice. They sang for
      half a minute, then sank into silence. Emelyan started, jerked his elbows
      and wriggled his fingers.
    

      “Lads,” he said in an imploring voice, “let’s sing
      something sacred!” Tears came into his eyes. “Lads,” he
      repeated, pressing his hands on his heart, “let’s sing
      something sacred!”
    

      “I don’t know anything,” said Konstantin.
    

      Everyone refused, then Emelyan sang alone. He waved both arms, nodded his
      head, opened his mouth, but nothing came from his throat but a discordant
      gasp. He sang with his arms, with his head, with his eyes, even with the
      swelling on his face; he sang passionately with anguish, and the more he
      strained his chest to extract at least one note from it, the more
      discordant were his gasps.
    

      Yegorushka, like the rest, was overcome with depression. He went to his
      waggon, clambered up on the bales and lay down. He looked at the sky, and
      thought of happy Konstantin and his wife. Why did people get married? What
      were women in the world for? Yegorushka put the vague questions to
      himself, and thought that a man would certainly be happy if he had an
      affectionate, merry and beautiful woman continually living at his side.
      For some reason he remembered the Countess Dranitsky, and thought it would
      probably be very pleasant to live with a woman like that; he would perhaps
      have married her with pleasure if that idea had not been so shameful. He
      recalled her eyebrows, the pupils of her eyes, her carriage, the clock
      with the horseman. . . . The soft warm night moved softly down upon him
      and whispered something in his ear, and it seemed to him that it was that
      lovely woman bending over him, looking at him with a smile and meaning to
      kiss him. . . .
    

      Nothing was left of the fire but two little red eyes, which kept on
      growing smaller and smaller. Konstantin and the waggoners were sitting by
      it, dark motionless figures, and it seemed as though there were many more
      of them than before. The twin crosses were equally visible, and far, far
      away, somewhere by the highroad there gleamed a red light—other
      people cooking their porridge, most likely.
    

      “Our Mother Russia is the he-ad of all the world!” Kiruha sang
      out suddenly in a harsh voice, choked and subsided. The steppe echo caught
      up his voice, carried it on, and it seemed as though stupidity itself were
      rolling on heavy wheels over the steppe.
    

      “It’s time to go,” said Panteley. “Get up, lads.”
    

      While they were putting the horses in, Konstantin walked by the waggons
      and talked rapturously of his wife.
    

      “Good-bye, mates!” he cried when the waggons started. “Thank
      you for your hospitality. I shall go on again towards that light. It’s
      more than I can stand.”
    

      And he quickly vanished in the mist, and for a long time they could hear
      him striding in the direction of the light to tell those other strangers
      of his happiness.
    

      When Yegorushka woke up next day it was early morning; the sun had not yet
      risen. The waggons were at a standstill. A man in a white cap and a suit
      of cheap grey material, mounted on a little Cossack stallion, was talking
      to Dymov and Kiruha beside the foremost waggon. A mile and a half ahead
      there were long low white barns and little houses with tiled roofs; there
      were neither yards nor trees to be seen beside the little houses.
    

      “What village is that, Grandfather?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      “That’s the Armenian Settlement, youngster,” answered
      Panteley. “The Armenians live there. They are a good sort of people,
      . . . the Arnienians are.”
    

      The man in grey had finished talking to Dymov and Kiruha; he pulled up his
      little stallion and looked across towards the settlement.
    

      “What a business, only think!” sighed Panteley, looking
      towards the settlement, too, and shuddering at the morning freshness.
      “He has sent a man to the settlement for some papers, and he doesn’t
      come . . . . He should have sent Styopka.”
    

      “Who is that, Grandfather?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      “Varlamov.”
    

      My goodness! Yegorushka jumped up quickly, getting upon his knees, and
      looked at the white cap. It was hard to recognize the mysterious elusive
      Varlamov, who was sought by everyone, who was always “on his rounds,”
      and who had far more money than Countess Dranitsky, in the short, grey
      little man in big boots, who was sitting on an ugly little nag and talking
      to peasants at an hour when all decent people were asleep.
    

      “He is all right, a good man,” said Panteley, looking towards
      the settlement. “God give him health—a splendid gentleman,
      Semyon Alexandritch. . . . It’s people like that the earth rests
      upon. That’s true. . . . The cocks are not crowing yet, and he is
      already up and about. . . . Another man would be asleep, or gallivanting
      with visitors at home, but he is on the steppe all day, . . . on his
      rounds. . . . He does not let things slip. . . . No-o! He’s a fine
      fellow. . .”
    

      Varlamov was talking about something, while he kept his eyes fixed. The
      little stallion shifted from one leg to another impatiently.
    

      “Semyon Alexandritch!” cried Panteley, taking off his hat.
      “Allow us to send Styopka! Emelyan, call out that Styopka should be
      sent.”
    

      But now at last a man on horseback could be seen coming from the
      settlement. Bending very much to one side and brandishing his whip above
      his head like a gallant young Caucasian, and wanting to astonish everyone
      by his horsemanship, he flew towards the waggons with the swiftness of a
      bird.
    

      “That must be one of his circuit men,” said Panteley. “He
      must have a hundred such horsemen or maybe more.”
    

      Reaching the first waggon, he pulled up his horse, and taking off his hat,
      handed Varlamov a little book. Varlamov took several papers out of the
      book, read them and cried:
    

      “And where is Ivantchuk’s letter?”
    

      The horseman took the book back, looked at the papers and shrugged his
      shoulders. He began saying something, probably justifying himself and
      asking to be allowed to ride back to the settlement again. The little
      stallion suddenly stirred as though Varlamov had grown heavier. Varlamov
      stirred too.
    

      “Go along!” he cried angrily, and he waved his whip at the
      man.
    

      Then he turned his horse round and, looking through the papers in the
      book, moved at a walking pace alongside the waggons. When he reached the
      hindmost, Yegorushka strained his eyes to get a better look at him.
      Varlamov was an elderly man. His face, a simple Russian sunburnt face with
      a small grey beard, was red, wet with dew and covered with little blue
      veins; it had the same expression of businesslike coldness as Ivan
      Ivanitch’s face, the same look of fanatical zeal for business. But
      yet what a difference could be felt between him and Kuzmitchov! Uncle Ivan
      Ivanitch always had on his face, together with his business-like reserve,
      a look of anxiety and apprehension that he would not find Varlamov, that
      he would be late, that he would miss a good price; nothing of that sort,
      so characteristic of small and dependent persons, could be seen in the
      face or figure of Varlamov. This man made the price himself, was not
      looking for anyone, and did not depend on anyone; however ordinary his
      exterior, yet in everything, even in the manner of holding his whip, there
      was a sense of power and habitual authority over the steppe.
    

      As he rode by Yegorushka he did not glance at him. Only the little
      stallion deigned to notice Yegorushka; he looked at him with his large
      foolish eyes, and even he showed no interest. Panteley bowed to Varlamov;
      the latter noticed it, and without taking his eyes off the sheets of
      paper, said lisping:
    

      “How are you, old man?”
    

      Varlamov’s conversation with the horseman and the way he had
      brandished his whip had evidently made an overwhelming impression on the
      whole party. Everyone looked grave. The man on horseback, cast down at the
      anger of the great man, remained stationary, with his hat off, and the
      rein loose by the foremost waggon; he was silent, and seemed unable to
      grasp that the day had begun so badly for him.
    

      “He is a harsh old man, . .” muttered Panteley. “It’s
      a pity he is so harsh! But he is all right, a good man. . . . He doesn’t
      abuse men for nothing. . . . It’s no matter. . . .”
    

      After examining the papers, Varlamov thrust the book into his pocket; the
      little stallion, as though he knew what was in his mind, without waiting
      for orders, started and dashed along the highroad.
    

      VII
    

      On the following night the waggoners had halted and were cooking their
      porridge. On this occasion there was a sense of overwhelming oppression
      over everyone. It was sultry; they all drank a great deal, but could not
      quench their thirst. The moon was intensely crimson and sullen, as though
      it were sick. The stars, too, were sullen, the mist was thicker, the
      distance more clouded. Nature seemed as though languid and weighed down by
      some foreboding.
    

      There was not the same liveliness and talk round the camp fire as there
      had been the day before. All were dreary and spoke listlessly and without
      interest. Panteley did nothing but sigh and complain of his feet, and
      continually alluded to impenitent deathbeds.
    

      Dymov was lying on his stomach, chewing a straw in silence; there was an
      expression of disgust on his face as though the straw smelt unpleasant, a
      spiteful and exhausted look. . . . Vassya complained that his jaw ached,
      and prophesied bad weather; Emelyan was not waving his arms, but sitting
      still and looking gloomily at the fire. Yegorushka, too, was weary. This
      slow travelling exhausted him, and the sultriness of the day had given him
      a headache.
    

      While they were cooking the porridge, Dymov, to relieve his boredom, began
      quarrelling with his companions.
    

      “Here he lolls, the lumpy face, and is the first to put his spoon
      in,” he said, looking spitefully at Emelyan. “Greedy! always
      contrives to sit next the cauldron. He’s been a church-singer, so he
      thinks he is a gentleman! There are a lot of singers like you begging
      along the highroad!”
    

      “What are you pestering me for?” asked Emelyan, looking at him
      angrily.
    

      “To teach you not to be the first to dip into the cauldron. Don’t
      think too much of yourself!”
    

      “You are a fool, and that is all about it!” wheezed out
      Emelyan.
    

      Knowing by experience how such conversations usually ended, Panteley and
      Vassya intervened and tried to persuade Dymov not to quarrel about
      nothing.
    

      “A church-singer!” The bully would not desist, but laughed
      contemptuously. “Anyone can sing like that—sit in the church
      porch and sing ‘Give me alms, for Christ’s sake!’ Ugh!
      you are a nice fellow!”
    

      Emelyan did not speak. His silence had an irritating effect on Dymov. He
      looked with still greater hatred at the ex-singer and said:
    

      “I don’t care to have anything to do with you, or I would show
      you what to think of yourself.”
    

      “But why are you pushing me, you Mazeppa?” Emelyan cried,
      flaring up. “Am I interfering with you?”
    

      “What did you call me?” asked Dymov, drawing himself up, and
      his eyes were suffused with blood. “Eh! I am a Mazeppa? Yes? Take
      that, then; go and look for it.”
    

      Dymov snatched the spoon out of Emelyan’s hand and flung it far
      away. Kiruha, Vassya, and Styopka ran to look for it, while Emelyan fixed
      an imploring and questioning look on Panteley. His face suddenly became
      small and wrinkled; it began twitching, and the ex-singer began to cry
      like a child.
    

      Yegorushka, who had long hated Dymov, felt as though the air all at once
      were unbearably stifling, as though the fire were scorching his face; he
      longed to run quickly to the waggons in the darkness, but the bully’s
      angry bored eyes drew the boy to him. With a passionate desire to say
      something extremely offensive, he took a step towards Dymov and brought
      out, gasping for breath:
    

      “You are the worst of the lot; I can’t bear you!”
    

      After this he ought to have run to the waggons, but he could not stir from
      the spot and went on:
    

      “In the next world you will burn in hell! I’ll complain to
      Ivan Ivanitch. Don’t you dare insult Emelyan!”
    

      “Say this too, please,” laughed Dyrnov: “‘every
      little sucking-pig wants to lay down the law.’ Shall I pull your
      ear?”
    

      Yegorushka felt that he could not breathe; and something which had never
      happened to him before—he suddenly began shaking all over, stamping
      his feet and crying shrilly:
    

      “Beat him, beat him!”
    

      Tears gushed from his eyes; he felt ashamed, and ran staggering back to
      the waggon. The effect produced by his outburst he did not see. Lying on
      the bales and twitching his arms and legs, he whispered:
    

      “Mother, mother!”
    

      And these men and the shadows round the camp fire, and the dark bales and
      the far-away lightning, which was flashing every minute in the distance—all
      struck him now as terrible and unfriendly. He was overcome with terror and
      asked himself in despair why and how he had come into this unknown land in
      the company of terrible peasants? Where was his uncle now, where was
      Father Christopher, where was Deniska? Why were they so long in coming?
      Hadn’t they forgotten him? At the thought that he was forgotten and
      cast out to the mercy of fate, he felt such a cold chill of dread that he
      had several times an impulse to jump off the bales of wool, and run back
      full speed along the road; but the thought of the huge dark crosses, which
      would certainly meet him on the way, and the lightning flashing in the
      distance, stopped him. . . . And only when he whispered, “Mother,
      mother!” he felt as it were a little better.
    

      The waggoners must have been full of dread, too. After Yegorushka had run
      away from the camp fire they sat at first for a long time in silence, then
      they began speaking in hollow undertones about something, saying that it
      was coming and that they must make haste and get away from it. . . . They
      quickly finished supper, put out the fire and began harnessing the horses
      in silence. From their fluster and the broken phrases they uttered it was
      apparent they foresaw some trouble. Before they set off on their way,
      Dymov went up to Panteley and asked softly:
    

      “What’s his name?”
    

      “Yegory,” answered Panteley.
    

      Dymov put one foot on the wheel, caught hold of the cord which was tied
      round the bales and pulled himself up. Yegorushka saw his face and curly
      head. The face was pale and looked grave and exhausted, but there was no
      expression of spite in it.
    

      “Yera!” he said softly, “here, hit me!”
    

      Yegorushka looked at him in surprise. At that instant there was a flash of
      lightning.
    

      “It’s all right, hit me,” repeated Dymov. And without
      waiting for Yegorushka to hit him or to speak to him, he jumped down and
      said: “How dreary I am!”
    

      Then, swaying from one leg to the other and moving his shoulder-blades, he
      sauntered lazily alongside the string of waggons and repeated in a voice
      half weeping, half angry:
    

      “How dreary I am! O Lord! Don’t you take offence, Emelyan,”
      he said as he passed Emelyan. “Ours is a wretched cruel life!”
    

      There was a flash of lightning on the right, and, like a reflection in the
      looking-glass, at once a second flash in the distance.
    

      “Yegory, take this,” cried Panteley, throwing up something big
      and dark.
    

      “What is it?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      “A mat. There will be rain, so cover yourself up.”
    

      Yegorushka sat up and looked about him. The distance had grown perceptibly
      blacker, and now oftener than every minute winked with a pale light. The
      blackness was being bent towards the right as though by its own weight.
    

      “Will there be a storm, Grandfather?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      “Ah, my poor feet, how they ache!” Panteley said in a
      high-pitched voice, stamping his feet and not hearing the boy.
    

      On the left someone seemed to strike a match in the sky; a pale
      phosphorescent streak gleamed and went out. There was a sound as though
      someone very far away were walking over an iron roof, probably barefoot,
      for the iron gave a hollow rumble.
    

      “It’s set in!” cried Kiruha.
    

      Between the distance and the horizon on the right there was a flash of
      lightning so vivid that it lighted up part of the steppe and the spot
      where the clear sky met the blackness. A terrible cloud was swooping down,
      without haste, a compact mass; big black shreds hung from its edge;
      similar shreds pressing one upon another were piling up on the right and
      left horizon. The tattered, ragged look of the storm-cloud gave it a
      drunken disorderly air. There was a distinct, not smothered, growl of
      thunder. Yegorushka crossed himself and began quickly putting on his
      great-coat.
    

      “I am dreary!” Dymov’s shout floated from the foremost
      waggon, and it could be told from his voice that he was beginning to be
      ill-humoured again. “I am so dreary!”
    

      All at once there was a squall of wind, so violent that it almost snatched
      away Yegorushka’s bundle and mat; the mat fluttered in all
      directions and flapped on the bale and on Yegorushka’s face. The
      wind dashed whistling over the steppe, whirled round in disorder and
      raised such an uproar from the grass that neither the thunder nor the
      creaking of the wheels could be heard; it blew from the black storm-cloud,
      carrying with it clouds of dust and the scent of rain and wet earth. The
      moonlight grew mistier, as it were dirtier; the stars were even more
      overcast; and clouds of dust could be seen hurrying along the edge of the
      road, followed by their shadows. By now, most likely, the whirlwind
      eddying round and lifting from the earth dust, dry grass and feathers, was
      mounting to the very sky; uprooted plants must have been flying by that
      very black storm-cloud, and how frightened they must have been! But
      through the dust that clogged the eyes nothing could be seen but the flash
      of lightning.
    

      Yegorushka, thinking it would pour with rain in a minute, knelt up and
      covered himself with the mat.
    

      “Panteley-ey!” someone shouted in the front. “A. . . a.
      . . va!”
    

      “I can’t!” Panteley answered in a loud high voice.
      “A . . . a . . . va! Arya . . . a!”
    

      There was an angry clap of thunder, which rolled across the sky from right
      to left, then back again, and died away near the foremost waggon.
    

      “Holy, holy, holy, Lord of Sabaoth,” whispered Yegorushka,
      crossing himself. “Fill heaven and earth with Thy glory.”
    

      The blackness in the sky yawned wide and breathed white fire. At once
      there was another clap of thunder. It had scarcely ceased when there was a
      flash of lightning so broad that Yegorushka suddenly saw through a slit in
      the mat the whole highroad to the very horizon, all the waggoners and even
      Kiruha’s waistcoat. The black shreds had by now moved upwards from
      the left, and one of them, a coarse, clumsy monster like a claw with
      fingers, stretched to the moon. Yegorushka made up his mind to shut his
      eyes tight, to pay no attention to it, and to wait till it was all over.
    

      The rain was for some reason long in coming. Yegorushka peeped out from
      the mat in the hope that perhaps the storm-cloud was passing over. It was
      fearfully dark. Yegorushka could see neither Panteley, nor the bale of
      wool, nor himself; he looked sideways towards the place where the moon had
      lately been, but there was the same black darkness there as over the
      waggons. And in the darkness the flashes of lightning seemed more violent
      and blinding, so that they hurt his eyes.
    

      “Panteley!” called Yegorushka.
    

      No answer followed. But now a gust of wind for the last time flung up the
      mat and hurried away. A quiet regular sound was heard. A big cold drop
      fell on Yegorushka’s knee, another trickled over his hand. He
      noticed that his knees were not covered, and tried to rearrange the mat,
      but at that moment something began pattering on the road, then on the
      shafts and the bales. It was the rain. As though they understood one
      another, the rain and the mat began prattling of something rapidly, gaily
      and most annoyingly like two magpies.
    

      Yegorushka knelt up or rather squatted on his boots. While the rain was
      pattering on the mat, he leaned forward to screen his knees, which were
      suddenly wet. He succeeded in covering his knees, but in less than a
      minute was aware of a penetrating, unpleasant dampness behind on his back
      and the calves of his legs. He returned to his former position, exposing
      his knees to the rain, and wondered what to do to rearrange the mat which
      he could not see in the darkness. But his arms were already wet, the water
      was trickling up his sleeves and down his collar, and his shoulder-blades
      felt chilly. And he made up his mind to do nothing but sit motionless and
      wait till it was all over.
    

      “Holy, holy, holy!” he whispered.
    

      Suddenly, exactly over his head, the sky cracked with a fearful deafening
      din; he huddled up and held his breath, waiting for the fragments to fall
      upon his head and back. He inadvertently opened his eyes and saw a
      blinding intense light flare out and flash five times on his fingers, his
      wet sleeves, and on the trickles of water running from the mat upon the
      bales and down to the ground. There was a fresh peal of thunder as violent
      and awful; the sky was not growling and rumbling now, but uttering short
      crashing sounds like the crackling of dry wood.
    

      “Trrah! tah! tah! tah!” the thunder rang out distinctly,
      rolled over the sky, seemed to stumble, and somewhere by the foremost
      waggons or far behind to fall with an abrupt angry “Trrra!”
    

      The flashes of lightning had at first been only terrible, but with such
      thunder they seemed sinister and menacing. Their magic light pierced
      through closed eyelids and sent a chill all over the body. What could he
      do not to see them? Yegorushka made up his mind to turn over on his face.
      Cautiously, as though afraid of being watched, he got on all fours, and
      his hands slipping on the wet bale, he turned back again.
    

      “Trrah! tah! tah!” floated over his head, rolled under the
      waggons and exploded “Kraa!”
    

      Again he inadvertently opened his eyes and saw a new danger: three huge
      giants with long pikes were following the waggon! A flash of lightning
      gleamed on the points of their pikes and lighted up their figures very
      distinctly. They were men of huge proportions, with covered faces, bowed
      heads, and heavy footsteps. They seemed gloomy and dispirited and lost in
      thought. Perhaps they were not following the waggons with any harmful
      intent, and yet there was something awful in their proximity.
    

      Yegorushka turned quickly forward, and trembling all over cried: “Panteley!
      Grandfather!”
    

      “Trrah! tah! tah!” the sky answered him.
    

      He opened his eyes to see if the waggoners were there. There were flashes
      of lightning in two places, which lighted up the road to the far distance,
      the whole string of waggons and all the waggoners. Streams of water were
      flowing along the road and bubbles were dancing. Panteley was walking
      beside the waggon; his tall hat and his shoulder were covered with a small
      mat; his figure expressed neither terror nor uneasiness, as though he were
      deafened by the thunder and blinded by the lightning.
    

      “Grandfather, the giants!” Yegorushka shouted to him in tears.
    

      But the old man did not hear. Further away walked Emelyan. He was covered
      from head to foot with a big mat and was triangular in shape. Vassya,
      without anything over him, was walking with the same wooden step as usual,
      lifting his feet high and not bending his knees. In the flash of lightning
      it seemed as though the waggons were not moving and the men were
      motionless, that Vassya’s lifted foot was rigid in the same
      position. . . .
    

      Yegorushka called the old man once more. Getting no answer, he sat
      motionless, and no longer waited for it all to end. He was convinced that
      the thunder would kill him in another minute, that he would accidentally
      open his eyes and see the terrible giants, and he left off crossing
      himself, calling the old man and thinking of his mother, and was simply
      numb with cold and the conviction that the storm would never end.
    

      But at last there was the sound of voices.
    

      “Yegory, are you asleep?” Panteley cried below. “Get
      down! Is he deaf, the silly little thing? . . .”
    

      “Something like a storm!” said an unfamiliar bass voice, and
      the stranger cleared his throat as though he had just tossed off a good
      glass of vodka.
    

      Yegorushka opened his eyes. Close to the waggon stood Panteley, Emelyan,
      looking like a triangle, and the giants. The latter were by now much
      shorter, and when Yegorushka looked more closely at them they turned out
      to be ordinary peasants, carrying on their shoulders not pikes but
      pitchforks. In the space between Panteley and the triangular figure,
      gleamed the window of a low-pitched hut. So the waggons were halting in
      the village. Yegorushka flung off the mat, took his bundle and made haste
      to get off the waggon. Now when close to him there were people talking and
      a lighted window he no longer felt afraid, though the thunder was crashing
      as before and the whole sky was streaked with lightning.
    

      “It was a good storm, all right, . . .” Panteley was
      muttering. “Thank God, . . . my feet are a little softened by the
      rain. It was all right. . . . Have you got down, Yegory? Well, go into the
      hut; it is all right. . . .”
    

      “Holy, holy, holy!” wheezed Emelyan, “it must have
      struck something . . . . Are you of these parts?” he asked the
      giants.
    

      “No, from Glinovo. We belong to Glinovo. We are working at the
      Platers’.”
    

      “Threshing?”
    

      “All sorts. Just now we are getting in the wheat. The lightning, the
      lightning! It is long since we have had such a storm. . . .”
    

      Yegorushka went into the hut. He was met by a lean hunchbacked old woman
      with a sharp chin. She stood holding a tallow candle in her hands,
      screwing up her eyes and heaving prolonged sighs.
    

      “What a storm God has sent us!” she said. “And our lads
      are out for the night on the steppe; they’ll have a bad time, poor
      dears! Take off your things, little sir, take off your things.”
    

      Shivering with cold and shrugging squeamishly, Yegorushka pulled off his
      drenched overcoat, then stretched out his arms and straddled his legs, and
      stood a long time without moving. The slightest movement caused an
      unpleasant sensation of cold and wetness. His sleeves and the back of his
      shirt were sopped, his trousers stuck to his legs, his head was dripping.
    

      “What’s the use of standing there, with your legs apart,
      little lad?” said the old woman. “Come, sit down.”
    

      Holding his legs wide apart, Yegorushka went up to the table and sat down
      on a bench near somebody’s head. The head moved, puffed a stream of
      air through its nose, made a chewing sound and subsided. A mound covered
      with a sheepskin stretched from the head along the bench; it was a peasant
      woman asleep.
    

      The old woman went out sighing, and came back with a big water melon and a
      little sweet melon.
    

      “Have something to eat, my dear! I have nothing else to offer you, .
      . .” she said, yawning. She rummaged in the table and took out a
      long sharp knife, very much like the one with which the brigands killed
      the merchants in the inn. “Have some, my dear!”
    

      Yegorushka, shivering as though he were in a fever, ate a slice of sweet
      melon with black bread and then a slice of water melon, and that made him
      feel colder still.
    

      “Our lads are out on the steppe for the night, . . .” sighed
      the old woman while he was eating. “The terror of the Lord! I’d
      light the candle under the ikon, but I don’t know where Stepanida
      has put it. Have some more, little sir, have some more. . . .”
    

      The old woman gave a yawn and, putting her right hand behind her,
      scratched her left shoulder.
    

      “It must be two o’clock now,” she said; “it will
      soon be time to get up. Our lads are out on the steppe for the night; they
      are all wet through for sure. . . .”
    

      “Granny,” said Yegorushka. “I am sleepy.”
    

      “Lie down, my dear, lie down,” the old woman sighed, yawning.
      “Lord Jesus Christ! I was asleep, when I heard a noise as though
      someone were knocking. I woke up and looked, and it was the storm God had
      sent us. . . . I’d have lighted the candle, but I couldn’t
      find it.”
    

      Talking to herself, she pulled some rags, probably her own bed, off the
      bench, took two sheepskins off a nail by the stove, and began laying them
      out for a bed for Yegorushka. “The storm doesn’t grow less,”
      she muttered. “If only nothing’s struck in an unlucky hour.
      Our lads are out on the steppe for the night. Lie down and sleep, my dear.
      . . . Christ be with you, my child. . . . I won’t take away the
      melon; maybe you’ll have a bit when you get up.”
    

      The sighs and yawns of the old woman, the even breathing of the sleeping
      woman, the half-darkness of the hut, and the sound of the rain outside,
      made one sleepy. Yegorushka was shy of undressing before the old woman. He
      only took off his boots, lay down and covered himself with the sheepskin.
    

      “Is the little lad lying down?” he heard Panteley whisper a
      little later.
    

      “Yes,” answered the old woman in a whisper. “The terror
      of the Lord! It thunders and thunders, and there is no end to it.”
    

      “It will soon be over,” wheezed Panteley, sitting down;
      “it’s getting quieter. . . . The lads have gone into the huts,
      and two have stayed with the horses. The lads have. . . . They can’t;
      . . . the horses would be taken away. . . . I’ll sit here a bit and
      then go and take my turn. . . . We can’t leave them; they would be
      taken. . . .”
    

      Panteley and the old woman sat side by side at Yegorushka’s feet,
      talking in hissing whispers and interspersing their speech with sighs and
      yawns. And Yegorushka could not get warm. The warm heavy sheepskin lay on
      him, but he was trembling all over; his arms and legs were twitching, and
      his whole inside was shivering. . . . He undressed under the sheepskin,
      but that was no good. His shivering grew more and more acute.
    

      Panteley went out to take his turn with the horses, and afterwards came
      back again, and still Yegorushka was shivering all over and could not get
      to sleep. Something weighed upon his head and chest and oppressed him, and
      he did not know what it was, whether it was the old people whispering, or
      the heavy smell of the sheepskin. The melon he had eaten had left an
      unpleasant metallic taste in his mouth. Moreover he was being bitten by
      fleas.
    

      “Grandfather, I am cold,” he said, and did not know his own
      voice.
    

      “Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep,” sighed the old woman.
    

      Tit came up to the bedside on his thin little legs and waved his arms,
      then grew up to the ceiling and turned into a windmill. . . . Father
      Christopher, not as he was in the chaise, but in his full vestments with
      the sprinkler in his hand, walked round the mill, sprinkling it with holy
      water, and it left off waving. Yegorushka, knowing this was delirium,
      opened his eyes.
    

      “Grandfather,” he called, “give me some water.”
    

      No one answered. Yegorushka felt it insufferably stifling and
      uncomfortable lying down. He got up, dressed, and went out of the hut.
      Morning was beginning. The sky was overcast, but it was no longer raining.
      Shivering and wrapping himself in his wet overcoat, Yegorushka walked
      about the muddy yard and listened to the silence; he caught sight of a
      little shed with a half-open door made of reeds. He looked into this shed,
      went into it, and sat down in a dark corner on a heap of dry dung.
    

      There was a tangle of thoughts in his heavy head; his mouth was dry and
      unpleasant from the metallic taste. He looked at his hat, straightened the
      peacock’s feather on it, and thought how he had gone with his mother
      to buy the hat. He put his hand into his pocket and took out a lump of
      brownish sticky paste. How had that paste come into his pocket? He thought
      a minute, smelt it; it smelt of honey. Aha! it was the Jewish cake! How
      sopped it was, poor thing!
    

      Yegorushka examined his coat. It was a little grey overcoat with big bone
      buttons, cut in the shape of a frock-coat. At home, being a new and
      expensive article, it had not been hung in the hall, but with his mother’s
      dresses in her bedroom; he was only allowed to wear it on holidays.
      Looking at it, Yegorushka felt sorry for it. He thought that he and the
      great-coat were both abandoned to the mercy of destiny; he thought that he
      would never get back home, and began sobbing so violently that he almost
      fell off the heap of dung.
    

      A big white dog with woolly tufts like curl-papers about its face, sopping
      from the rain, came into the shed and stared with curiosity at Yegorushka.
      It seemed to be hesitating whether to bark or not. Deciding that there was
      no need to bark, it went cautiously up to Yegorushka, ate the sticky
      plaster and went out again.
    

      “There are Varlamov’s men!” someone shouted in the
      street.
    

      After having his cry out, Yegorushka went out of the shed and, walking
      round a big puddle, made his way towards the street. The waggons were
      standing exactly opposite the gateway. The drenched waggoners, with their
      muddy feet, were sauntering beside them or sitting on the shafts, as
      listless and drowsy as flies in autumn. Yegorushka looked at them and
      thought: “How dreary and comfortless to be a peasant!” He went
      up to Panteley and sat down beside him on the shaft.
    

      “Grandfather, I’m cold,” he said, shivering and
      thrusting his hands up his sleeves.
    

      “Never mind, we shall soon be there,” yawned Panteley. “Never
      mind, you will get warm.”
    

      It must have been early when the waggons set off, for it was not hot.
      Yegorushka lay on the bales of wool and shivered with cold, though the sun
      soon came out and dried his clothes, the bales, and the earth. As soon as
      he closed his eyes he saw Tit and the windmill again. Feeling a sickness
      and heaviness all over, he did his utmost to drive away these images, but
      as soon as they vanished the dare-devil Dymov, with red eyes and lifted
      fists, rushed at Yegorushka with a roar, or there was the sound of his
      complaint: “I am so dreary!” Varlamov rode by on his little
      Cossack stallion; happy Konstantin passed, with a smile and the bustard in
      his arms. And how tedious these people were, how sickening and unbearable!
    

      Once—it was towards evening—he raised his head to ask for
      water. The waggons were standing on a big bridge across a broad river.
      There was black smoke below over the river, and through it could be seen a
      steamer with a barge in tow. Ahead of them, beyond the river, was a huge
      mountain dotted with houses and churches; at the foot of the mountain an
      engine was being shunted along beside some goods trucks.
    

      Yegorushka had never before seen steamers, nor engines, nor broad rivers.
      Glancing at them now, he was not alarmed or surprised; there was not even
      a look of anything like curiosity in his face. He merely felt sick, and
      made haste to turn over to the edge of the bale. He was sick. Panteley,
      seeing this, cleared his throat and shook his head.
    

      “Our little lad’s taken ill,” he said. “He must
      have got a chill to the stomach. The little lad must. . . away from home;
      it’s a bad lookout!”
    

      VIII
    

      The waggons stopped at a big inn for merchants, not far from the quay. As
      Yegorushka climbed down from the waggon he heard a very familiar voice.
      Someone was helping him to get down, and saying:
    

      “We arrived yesterday evening. . . . We have been expecting you all
      day. We meant to overtake you yesterday, but it was out of our way; we
      came by the other road. I say, how you have crumpled your coat! You’ll
      catch it from your uncle!”
    

      Yegorushka looked into the speaker’s mottled face and remembered
      that this was Deniska.
    

      “Your uncle and Father Christopher are in the inn now, drinking tea;
      come along!”
    

      And he led Yegorushka to a big two-storied building, dark and gloomy like
      the almshouse at N. After going across the entry, up a dark staircase and
      through a narrow corridor, Yegorushka and Deniska reached a little room in
      which Ivan Ivanitch and Father Christopher were sitting at the tea-table.
      Seeing the boy, both the old men showed surprise and pleasure.
    

      “Aha! Yegor Ni-ko-la-aitch!” chanted Father Christopher.
      “Mr. Lomonosov!”
    

      “Ah, our gentleman that is to be,” said Kuzmitchov, “pleased
      to see you!”
    

      Yegorushka took off his great-coat, kissed his uncle’s hand and
      Father Christopher’s, and sat down to the table.
    

      “Well, how did you like the journey, puer bone?” Father
      Christopher pelted him with questions as he poured him out some tea, with
      his radiant smile. “Sick of it, I’ve no doubt? God save us all
      from having to travel by waggon or with oxen. You go on and on, God
      forgive us; you look ahead and the steppe is always lying stretched out
      the same as it was—you can’t see the end of it! It’s not
      travelling but regular torture. Why don’t you drink your tea? Drink
      it up; and in your absence, while you have been trailing along with the
      waggons, we have settled all our business capitally. Thank God we have
      sold our wool to Tcherepahin, and no one could wish to have done better. .
      . . We have made a good bargain.”
    

      At the first sight of his own people Yegorushka felt an overwhelming
      desire to complain. He did not listen to Father Christopher, but thought
      how to begin and what exactly to complain of. But Father Christopher’s
      voice, which seemed to him harsh and unpleasant, prevented him from
      concentrating his attention and confused his thoughts. He had not sat at
      the table five minutes before he got up, went to the sofa and lay down.
    

      “Well, well,” said Father Christopher in surprise. “What
      about your tea?”
    

      Still thinking what to complain of, Yegorushka leaned his head against the
      wall and broke into sobs.
    

      “Well, well!” repeated Father Christopher, getting up and
      going to the sofa. “Yegory, what is the matter with you? Why are you
      crying?”
    

      “I’m . . . I’m ill,” Yegorushka brought out.
    

      “Ill?” said Father Christopher in amazement. “That’s
      not the right thing, my boy. . . . One mustn’t be ill on a journey.
      Aie, aie, what are you thinking about, boy . . . eh?”
    

      He put his hand to Yegorushka’s head, touched his cheek and said:
    

      “Yes, your head’s feverish. . . . You must have caught cold or
      else have eaten something. . . . Pray to God.”
    

      “Should we give him quinine? . . .” said Ivan Ivanitch,
      troubled.
    

      “No; he ought to have something hot. . . . Yegory, have a little
      drop of soup? Eh?”
    

      “I . . . don’t want any,” said Yegorushka.
    

      “Are you feeling chilly?”
    

      “I was chilly before, but now . . . now I am hot. And I ache all
      over. . . .”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch went up to the sofa, touched Yegorushka on the head, cleared
      his throat with a perplexed air, and went back to the table.
    

      “I tell you what, you undress and go to bed,” said Father
      Christopher. “What you want is sleep now.”
    

      He helped Yegorushka to undress, gave him a pillow and covered him with a
      quilt, and over that Ivan Ivanitch’s great-coat. Then he walked away
      on tiptoe and sat down to the table. Yegorushka shut his eyes, and at once
      it seemed to him that he was not in the hotel room, but on the highroad
      beside the camp fire. Emelyan waved his hands, and Dymov with red eyes lay
      on his stomach and looked mockingly at Yegorushka.
    

      “Beat him, beat him!” shouted Yegorushka.
    

      “He is delirious,” said Father Christopher in an undertone.
    

      “It’s a nuisance!” sighed Ivan Ivanitch.
    

      “He must be rubbed with oil and vinegar. Please God, he will be
      better to-morrow.”
    

      To be rid of bad dreams, Yegorushka opened his eyes and began looking
      towards the fire. Father Christopher and Ivan Ivanitch had now finished
      their tea and were talking in a whisper. The first was smiling with
      delight, and evidently could not forget that he had made a good bargain
      over his wool; what delighted him was not so much the actual profit he had
      made as the thought that on getting home he would gather round him his big
      family, wink slyly and go off into a chuckle; at first he would deceive
      them all, and say that he had sold the wool at a price below its value,
      then he would give his son-in-law, Mihail, a fat pocket-book and say:
      “Well, take it! that’s the way to do business!”
      Kuzmitchov did not seem pleased; his face expressed, as before, a
      business-like reserve and anxiety.
    

      “If I could have known that Tcherepahin would give such a price,”
      he said in a low voice, “I wouldn’t have sold Makarov those
      five tons at home. It is vexatious! But who could have told that the price
      had gone up here?”
    

      A man in a white shirt cleared away the samovar and lighted the little
      lamp before the ikon in the corner. Father Christopher whispered something
      in his ear; the man looked, made a serious face like a conspirator, as
      though to say, “I understand,” went out, and returned a little
      while afterwards and put something under the sofa. Ivan Ivanitch made
      himself a bed on the floor, yawned several times, said his prayers lazily,
      and lay down.
    

      “I think of going to the cathedral to-morrow,” said Father
      Christopher. “I know the sacristan there. I ought to go and see the
      bishop after mass, but they say he is ill.”
    

      He yawned and put out the lamp. Now there was no light in the room but the
      little lamp before the ikon.
    

      “They say he can’t receive visitors,” Father Christopher
      went on, undressing. “So I shall go away without seeing him.”
    

      He took off his full coat, and Yegorushka saw Robinson Crusoe reappear.
      Robinson stirred something in a saucer, went up to Yegorushka and
      whispered:
    

      “Lomonosov, are you asleep? Sit up; I’m going to rub you with
      oil and vinegar. It’s a good thing, only you must say a prayer.”
    

      Yegorushka roused himself quickly and sat up. Father Christopher pulled
      down the boy’s shirt, and shrinking and breathing jerkily, as though
      he were being tickled himself, began rubbing Yegorushka’s chest.
    

      “In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,” he
      whispered, “lie with your back upwards—that’s it. . . .
      You’ll be all right to-morrow, but don’t do it again. . . .
      You are as hot as fire. I suppose you were on the road in the storm.”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “You might well fall ill! In the name of the Father, the Son, and
      the Holy Ghost, . . . you might well fall ill!”
    

      After rubbing Yegorushka, Father Christopher put on his shirt again,
      covered him, made the sign of the cross over him, and walked away. Then
      Yegorushka saw him saying his prayers. Probably the old man knew a great
      many prayers by heart, for he stood a long time before the ikon murmuring.
      After saying his prayers he made the sign of the cross over the window,
      the door, Yegorushka, and Ivan Ivanitch, lay down on the little sofa
      without a pillow, and covered himself with his full coat. A clock in the
      corridor struck ten. Yegorushka thought how long a time it would be before
      morning; feeling miserable, he pressed his forehead against the back of
      the sofa and left off trying to get rid of the oppressive misty dreams.
      But morning came much sooner than he expected.
    

      It seemed to him that he had not been lying long with his head pressed to
      the back of the sofa, but when he opened his eyes slanting rays of
      sunlight were already shining on the floor through the two windows of the
      little hotel room. Father Christopher and Ivan Ivanitch were not in the
      room. The room had been tidied; it was bright, snug, and smelt of Father
      Christopher, who always smelt of cypress and dried cornflowers (at home he
      used to make the holy-water sprinklers and decorations for the ikonstands
      out of cornflowers, and so he was saturated with the smell of them).
      Yegorushka looked at the pillow, at the slanting sunbeams, at his boots,
      which had been cleaned and were standing side by side near the sofa, and
      laughed. It seemed strange to him that he was not on the bales of wool,
      that everything was dry around him, and that there was no thunder and
      lightning on the ceiling.
    

      He jumped off the sofa and began dressing. He felt splendid; nothing was
      left of his yesterday’s illness but a slight weakness in his legs
      and neck. So the vinegar and oil had done good. He remembered the steamer,
      the railway engine, and the broad river, which he had dimly seen the day
      before, and now he made haste to dress, to run to the quay and have a look
      at them. When he had washed and was putting on his red shirt, the latch of
      the door clicked, and Father Christopher appeared in the doorway, wearing
      his top-hat and a brown silk cassock over his canvas coat and carrying his
      staff in his hand. Smiling and radiant (old men are always radiant when
      they come back from church), he put a roll of holy bread and a parcel of
      some sort on the table, prayed before the ikon, and said:
    

      “God has sent us blessings—well, how are you?”
    

      “Quite well now,” answered Yegorushka, kissing his hand.
    

      “Thank God. . . . I have come from mass. I’ve been to see a
      sacristan I know. He invited me to breakfast with him, but I didn’t
      go. I don’t like visiting people too early, God bless them!”
    

      He took off his cassock, stroked himself on the chest, and without haste
      undid the parcel. Yegorushka saw a little tin of caviare, a piece of dry
      sturgeon, and a French loaf.
    

      “See; I passed a fish-shop and brought this,” said Father
      Christopher. “There is no need to indulge in luxuries on an ordinary
      weekday; but I thought, I’ve an invalid at home, so it is excusable.
      And the caviare is good, real sturgeon. . . .”
    

      The man in the white shirt brought in the samovar and a tray with
      tea-things.
    

      “Eat some,” said Father Christopher, spreading the caviare on
      a slice of bread and handing it to Yegorushka. “Eat now and enjoy
      yourself, but the time will soon come for you to be studying. Mind you
      study with attention and application, so that good may come of it. What
      you have to learn by heart, learn by heart, but when you have to tell the
      inner sense in your own words, without regard to the outer form, then say
      it in your own words. And try to master all subjects. One man knows
      mathematics excellently, but has never heard of Pyotr Mogila; another
      knows about Pyotr Mogila, but cannot explain about the moon. But you study
      so as to understand everything. Study Latin, French, German, . . .
      geography, of course, history, theology, philosophy, mathematics, . . .
      and when you have mastered everything, not with haste but with prayer and
      with zeal, then go into the service. When you know everything it will be
      easy for you in any line of life. . . . You study and strive for the
      divine blessing, and God will show you what to be. Whether a doctor, a
      judge or an engineer. . . .”
    

      Father Christopher spread a little caviare on a piece of bread, put it in
      his mouth and said:
    

      “The Apostle Paul says: ‘Do not apply yourself to strange and
      diverse studies.’ Of course, if it is black magic, unlawful arts, or
      calling up spirits from the other world, like Saul, or studying subjects
      that can be of no use to yourself or others, better not learn them. You
      must undertake only what God has blessed. Take example . . . the Holy
      Apostles spoke in all languages, so you study languages. Basil the Great
      studied mathematics and philosophy—so you study them; St. Nestor
      wrote history—so you study and write history. Take example from the
      saints.”
    

      Father Christopher sipped the tea from his saucer, wiped his moustaches,
      and shook his head.
    

      “Good!” he said. “I was educated in the old-fashioned
      way; I have forgotten a great deal by now, but still I live differently
      from other people. Indeed, there is no comparison. For instance, in
      company at a dinner, or at an assembly, one says something in Latin, or
      makes some allusion from history or philosophy, and it pleases people, and
      it pleases me myself. . . . Or when the circuit court comes and one has to
      take the oath, all the other priests are shy, but I am quite at home with
      the judges, the prosecutors, and the lawyers. I talk intellectually, drink
      a cup of tea with them, laugh, ask them what I don’t know, . . . and
      they like it. So that’s how it is, my boy. Learning is light and
      ignorance is darkness. Study! It’s hard, of course; nowadays study
      is expensive. . . . Your mother is a widow; she lives on her pension, but
      there, of course . . .”
    

      Father Christopher glanced apprehensively towards the door, and went on in
      a whisper:
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch will assist. He won’t desert you. He has no
      children of his own, and he will help you. Don’t be uneasy.”
    

      He looked grave, and whispered still more softly:
    

      “Only mind, Yegory, don’t forget your mother and Ivan
      Ivanitch, God preserve you from it. The commandment bids you honour your
      mother, and Ivan Ivanitch is your benefactor and takes the place of a
      father to you. If you become learned, God forbid you should be impatient
      and scornful with people because they are not so clever as you, then woe,
      woe to you!”
    

      Father Christopher raised his hand and repeated in a thin voice:
    

      “Woe to you! Woe to you!”
    

      Father Christopher’s tongue was loosened, and he was, as they say,
      warming to his subject; he would not have finished till dinnertime but the
      door opened and Ivan Ivanitch walked in. He said good-morning hurriedly,
      sat down to the table, and began rapidly swallowing his tea.
    

      “Well, I have settled all our business,” he said. “We
      might have gone home to-day, but we have still to think about Yegor. We
      must arrange for him. My sister told me that Nastasya Petrovna, a friend
      of hers, lives somewhere here, so perhaps she will take him in as a
      boarder.”
    

      He rummaged in his pocket-book, found a crumpled note and read:
    

      “‘Little Lower Street: Nastasya Petrovna Toskunov, living in a
      house of her own.’ We must go at once and try to find her. It’s
      a nuisance!”
    

      Soon after breakfast Ivan Ivanitch and Yegorushka left the inn.
    

      “It’s a nuisance,” muttered his uncle. “You are
      sticking to me like a burr. You and your mother want education and
      gentlemanly breeding and I have nothing but worry with you both. . . .”
    

      When they crossed the yard, the waggons and the drivers were not there.
      They had all gone off to the quay early in the morning. In a far-off dark
      corner of the yard stood the chaise.
    

      “Good-bye, chaise!” thought Yegorushka.
    

      At first they had to go a long way uphill by a broad street, then they had
      to cross a big marketplace; here Ivan Ivanitch asked a policeman for
      Little Lower Street.
    

      “I say,” said the policeman, with a grin, “it’s a
      long way off, out that way towards the town grazing ground.”
    

      They met several cabs but Ivan Ivanitch only permitted himself such a
      weakness as taking a cab in exceptional cases and on great holidays.
      Yegorushka and he walked for a long while through paved streets, then
      along streets where there were only wooden planks at the sides and no
      pavements, and in the end got to streets where there were neither planks
      nor pavements. When their legs and their tongues had brought them to
      Little Lower Street they were both red in the face, and taking off their
      hats, wiped away the perspiration.
    

      “Tell me, please,” said Ivan Ivanitch, addressing an old man
      sitting on a little bench by a gate, “where is Nastasya Petrovna
      Toskunov’s house?”
    

      “There is no one called Toskunov here,” said the old man,
      after pondering a moment. “Perhaps it’s Timoshenko you want.”
    

      “No, Toskunov. . . .”
    

      “Excuse me, there’s no one called Toskunov. . . .”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch shrugged his shoulders and trudged on farther.
    

      “You needn’t look,” the old man called after them.
      “I tell you there isn’t, and there isn’t.”
    

      “Listen, auntie,” said Ivan Ivanitch, addressing an old woman
      who was sitting at a corner with a tray of pears and sunflower seeds,
      “where is Nastasya Petrovna Toskunov’s house?”
    

      The old woman looked at him with surprise and laughed.
    

      “Why, Nastasya Petrovna live in her own house now!” she cried.
      “Lord! it is eight years since she married her daughter and gave up
      the house to her son-in-law! It’s her son-in-law lives there now.”
    

      And her eyes expressed: “How is it you didn’t know a simple
      thing like that, you fools?”
    

      “And where does she live now?” Ivan Ivanitch asked.
    

      “Oh, Lord!” cried the old woman, flinging up her hands in
      surprise. “She moved ever so long ago! It’s eight years since
      she gave up her house to her son-in-law! Upon my word!”
    

      She probably expected Ivan Ivanitch to be surprised, too, and to exclaim:
      “You don’t say so,” but Ivan Ivanitch asked very calmly:
    

      “Where does she live now?”
    

      The old woman tucked up her sleeves and, stretching out her bare arm to
      point, shouted in a shrill piercing voice:
    

      “Go straight on, straight on, straight on. You will pass a little
      red house, then you will see a little alley on your left. Turn down that
      little alley, and it will be the third gate on the right. . . .”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch and Yegorushka reached the little red house, turned to the
      left down the little alley, and made for the third gate on the right. On
      both sides of this very old grey gate there was a grey fence with big gaps
      in it. The first part of the fence was tilting forwards and threatened to
      fall, while on the left of the gate it sloped backwards towards the yard.
      The gate itself stood upright and seemed to be still undecided which would
      suit it best —to fall forwards or backwards. Ivan Ivanitch opened
      the little gate at the side, and he and Yegorushka saw a big yard
      overgrown with weeds and burdocks. A hundred paces from the gate stood a
      little house with a red roof and green shutters. A stout woman with her
      sleeves tucked up and her apron held out was standing in the middle of the
      yard, scattering something on the ground and shouting in a voice as shrill
      as that of the woman selling fruit:
    

      “Chick! . . . Chick! . . . Chick!”
    

      Behind her sat a red dog with pointed ears. Seeing the strangers, he ran
      to the little gate and broke into a tenor bark (all red dogs have a tenor
      bark).
    

      “Whom do you want?” asked the woman, putting up her hand to
      shade her eyes from the sun.
    

      “Good-morning!” Ivan Ivanitch shouted, too, waving off the red
      dog with his stick. “Tell me, please, does Nastasya Petrovna
      Toskunov live here?”
    

      “Yes! But what do you want with her?”
    

      “Perhaps you are Nastasya Petrovna?”
    

      “Well, yes, I am!”
    

      “Very pleased to see you. . . . You see, your old friend Olga
      Ivanovna Knyasev sends her love to you. This is her little son. And I,
      perhaps you remember, am her brother Ivan Ivanitch. . . . You are one of
      us from N. . . . You were born among us and married there. . . .”
    

      A silence followed. The stout woman stared blankly at Ivan Ivanitch, as
      though not believing or not understanding him, then she flushed all over,
      and flung up her hands; the oats were scattered out of her apron and tears
      spurted from her eyes.
    

      “Olga Ivanovna!” she screamed, breathless with excitement.
      “My own darling! Ah, holy saints, why am I standing here like a
      fool? My pretty little angel. . . .”
    

      She embraced Yegorushka, wetted his face with her tears, and broke down
      completely.
    

      “Heavens!” she said, wringing her hands, “Olga’s
      little boy! How delightful! He is his mother all over! The image of his
      mother! But why are you standing in the yard? Come indoors.”
    

      Crying, gasping for breath and talking as she went, she hurried towards
      the house. Her visitors trudged after her.
    

      “The room has not been done yet,” she said, ushering the
      visitors into a stuffy little drawing-room adorned with many ikons and
      pots of flowers. “Oh, Mother of God! Vassilisa, go and open the
      shutters anyway! My little angel! My little beauty! I did not know that
      Olitchka had a boy like that!”
    

      When she had calmed down and got over her first surprise Ivan Ivanitch
      asked to speak to her alone. Yegorushka went into another room; there was
      a sewing-machine; in the window was a cage with a starling in it, and
      there were as many ikons and flowers as in the drawing-room. Near the
      machine stood a little girl with a sunburnt face and chubby cheeks like
      Tit’s, and a clean cotton dress. She stared at Yegorushka without
      bElinking, and apparently felt very awkward. Yegorushka looked at her and
      after a pause asked:
    

      “What’s your name?”
    

      The little girl moved her lips, looked as if she were going to cry, and
      answered softly:
    

      “Atka. . . .”
    

      This meant Katka.
    

      “He will live with you,” Ivan Ivanitch was whispering in the
      drawing-room, “if you will be so kind, and we will pay ten roubles a
      month for his keep. He is not a spoilt boy; he is quiet. . . .”
    

      “I really don’t know what to say, Ivan Ivanitch!”
      Nastasya Petrovna sighed tearfully. “Ten roubles a month is very
      good, but it is a dreadful thing to take another person’s child! He
      may fall ill or something. . . .”
    

      When Yegorushka was summoned back to the drawing-room Ivan Ivanitch was
      standing with his hat in his hands, saying good-bye.
    

      “Well, let him stay with you now, then,” he said. “Good-bye!
      You stay, Yegor!” he said, addressing his nephew. “Don’t
      be troublesome; mind you obey Nastasya Petrovna. . . . Good-bye; I am
      coming again to-morrow.”
    

      And he went away. Nastasya once more embraced Yegorushka, called him a
      little angel, and with a tear-stained face began preparing for dinner.
      Three minutes later Yegorushka was sitting beside her, answering her
      endless questions and eating hot savoury cabbage soup.
    

      In the evening he sat again at the same table and, resting his head on his
      hand, listened to Nastasya Petrovna. Alternately laughing and crying, she
      talked of his mother’s young days, her own marriage, her children. .
      . . A cricket chirruped in the stove, and there was a faint humming from
      the burner of the lamp. Nastasya Petrovna talked in a low voice, and was
      continually dropping her thimble in her excitement; and Katka her
      granddaughter, crawled under the table after it and each time sat a long
      while under the table, probably examining Yegorushka’s feet; and
      Yegorushka listened, half dozing and looking at the old woman’s
      face, her wart with hairs on it, and the stains of tears, and he felt sad,
      very sad. He was put to sleep on a chest and told that if he were hungry
      in the night he must go out into the little passage and take some chicken,
      put there under a plate in the window.
    

      Next morning Ivan Ivanitch and Father Christopher came to say good-bye.
      Nastasya Petrovna was delighted to see them, and was about to set the
      samovar; but Ivan Ivanitch, who was in a great hurry, waved his hands and
      said:
    

      “We have no time for tea! We are just setting off.”
    

      Before parting they all sat down and were silent for a minute. Nastasya
      Petrovna heaved a deep sigh and looked towards the ikon with tear-stained
      eyes.
    

      “Well,” began Ivan Ivanitch, getting up, “so you will
      stay. . . .”
    

      All at once the look of business-like reserve vanished from his face; he
      flushed a little and said with a mournful smile:
    

      “Mind you work hard. . . . Don’t forget your mother, and obey
      Nastasya Petrovna. . . . If you are diligent at school, Yegor, I’ll
      stand by you.”
    

      He took his purse out of his pocket, turned his back to Yegorushka,
      fumbled for a long time among the smaller coins, and, finding a ten-kopeck
      piece, gave it to Yegorushka.
    

      Father Christopher, without haste, blessed Yegorushka.
    

      “In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. . . .
      Study,” he said. “Work hard, my lad. If I die, remember me in
      your prayers. Here is a ten-kopeck piece from me, too. . . .”
    

      Yegorushka kissed his hand, and shed tears; something whispered in his
      heart that he would never see the old man again.
    

      “I have applied at the high school already,” said Ivan
      Ivanitch in a voice as though there were a corpse in the room. “You
      will take him for the entrance examination on the seventh of August. . . .
      Well, good-bye; God bless you, good-bye, Yegor!”
    

      “You might at least have had a cup of tea,” wailed Nastasya
      Petrovna.
    

      Through the tears that filled his eyes Yegorushka could not see his uncle
      and Father Christopher go out. He rushed to the window, but they were not
      in the yard, and the red dog, who had just been barking, was running back
      from the gate with the air of having done his duty. When Yegorushka ran
      out of the gate Ivan Ivanitch and Father Christopher, the former waving
      his stick with the crook, the latter his staff, were just turning the
      corner. Yegorushka felt that with these people all that he had known till
      then had vanished from him for ever. He sank helplessly on to the little
      bench, and with bitter tears greeted the new unknown life that was
      beginning for him now. . . .
    

      What would that life be like?
    





      Best Russian Short Stories
    











      INTRODUCTION
    

Conceive the joy of
      a lover of nature who, leaving the art galleries, wanders out among the
      trees and wild flowers and birds that the pictures of the galleries have
      sentimentalised. It is some such joy that the man who truly loves the
      noblest in letters feels when tasting for the first time the simple
      delights of Russian literature. French and English and German authors,
      too, occasionally, offer works of lofty, simple naturalness; but the very
      keynote to the whole of Russian literature is simplicity, naturalness,
      veraciousness.
    

      Another essentially Russian trait is the quite unaffected conception that
      the lowly are on a plane of equality with the so-called upper classes.
      When the Englishman Dickens wrote with his profound pity and understanding
      of the poor, there was yet a bit; of remoteness, perhaps, even, a bit of
      caricature, in his treatment of them. He showed their sufferings to the
      rest of the world with a “Behold how the other half lives!”
      The Russian writes of the poor, as it were, from within, as one of them,
      with no eye to theatrical effect upon the well-to-do. There is no
      insistence upon peculiar virtues or vices. The poor are portrayed just as
      they are, as human beings like the rest of us. A democratic spirit is
      reflected, breathing a broad humanity, a true universality, an unstudied
      generosity that proceed not from the intellectual conviction that to
      understand all is to forgive all, but from an instinctive feeling that no
      man has the right to set himself up as a judge over another, that one can
      only observe and record.
    

      In 1834 two short stories appeared, The Queen of Spades, by
      Pushkin, and The Cloak, by Gogol. The first was a finishing-off of
      the old, outgoing style of romanticism, the other was the beginning of the
      new, the characteristically Russian style. We read Pushkin’s Queen
      of Spades, the first story in the volume, and the likelihood is we
      shall enjoy it greatly. “But why is it Russian?” we ask. The
      answer is, “It is not Russian.” It might have been printed in
      an American magazine over the name of John Brown. But, now, take the very
      next story in the volume, The Cloak. “Ah,” you exclaim,
      “a genuine Russian story, Surely. You cannot palm it off on me over
      the name of Jones or Smith.” Why? Because The Cloak for the
      first time strikes that truly Russian note of deep sympathy with the
      disinherited. It is not yet wholly free from artificiality, and so is not
      yet typical of the purely realistic fiction that reached its perfected
      development in Turgenev and Tolstoy.
    

      Though Pushkin heads the list of those writers who made the literature of
      their country world-famous, he was still a romanticist, in the universal
      literary fashion of his day. However, he already gave strong indication of
      the peculiarly Russian genius for naturalness or realism, and was a true
      Russian in his simplicity of style. In no sense an innovator, but taking
      the cue for his poetry from Byron and for his prose from the romanticism
      current at that period, he was not in advance of his age. He had a
      revolutionary streak in his nature, as his Ode to Liberty and other
      bits of verse and his intimacy with the Decembrist rebels show. But his
      youthful fire soon died down, and he found it possible to accommodate
      himself to the life of a Russian high functionary and courtier under the
      severe despot Nicholas I, though, to be sure, he always hated that life.
      For all his flirting with revolutionarism, he never displayed great
      originality or depth of thought. He was simply an extraordinarily gifted
      author, a perfect versifier, a wondrous lyrist, and a delicious raconteur,
      endowed with a grace, ease and power of expression that delighted even the
      exacting artistic sense of Turgenev. To him aptly applies the dictum of
      Socrates: “Not by wisdom do the poets write poetry, but by a sort of
      genius and inspiration.” I do not mean to convey that as a thinker
      Pushkin is to be despised. Nevertheless, it is true that he would occupy a
      lower position in literature did his reputation depend upon his
      contributions to thought and not upon his value as an artist.
    

      “We are all descended from Gogol’s Cloak,” said a
      Russian writer. And Dostoyevsky’s novel, Poor People, which
      appeared ten years later, is, in a way, merely an extension of Gogol’s
      shorter tale. In Dostoyevsky, indeed, the passion for the common people
      and the all-embracing, all-penetrating pity for suffering humanity reach
      their climax. He was a profound psychologist and delved deeply into the
      human soul, especially in its abnormal and diseased aspects. Between
      scenes of heart-rending, abject poverty, injustice, and wrong, and the
      torments of mental pathology, he managed almost to exhaust the whole range
      of human woe. And he analysed this misery with an intensity of feeling and
      a painstaking regard for the most harrowing details that are quite
      upsetting to normally constituted nerves. Yet all the horrors must be
      forgiven him because of the motive inspiring them—an overpowering
      love and the desire to induce an equal love in others. It is not horror
      for horror’s sake, not a literary tour de force, as in Poe,
      but horror for a high purpose, for purification through suffering, which
      was one of the articles of Dostoyevsky’s faith.
    

      Following as a corollary from the love and pity for mankind that make a
      leading element in Russian literature, is a passionate search for the
      means of improving the lot of humanity, a fervent attachment to social
      ideas and ideals. A Russian author is more ardently devoted to a cause
      than an American short-story writer to a plot. This, in turn, is but a
      reflection of the spirit of the Russian people, especially of the
      intellectuals. The Russians take literature perhaps more seriously than
      any other nation. To them books are not a mere diversion. They demand that
      fiction and poetry be a true mirror of life and be of service to life. A
      Russian author, to achieve the highest recognition, must be a thinker
      also. He need not necessarily be a finished artist. Everything is
      subordinated to two main requirements—humanitarian ideals and
      fidelity to life. This is the secret of the marvellous simplicity of
      Russian-literary art. Before the supreme function of literature, the
      Russian writer stands awed and humbled. He knows he cannot cover up
      poverty of thought, poverty of spirit and lack of sincerity by rhetorical
      tricks or verbal cleverness. And if he possesses the two essential
      requirements, the simplest language will suffice.
    

      These qualities are exemplified at their best by Turgenev and Tolstoy.
      They both had a strong social consciousness; they both grappled with the
      problems of human welfare; they were both artists in the larger sense,
      that is, in their truthful representation of life, Turgenev was an artist
      also in the narrower sense—in a keen appreciation Of form.
      Thoroughly Occidental in his tastes, he sought the regeneration of Russia
      in radical progress along the lines of European democracy. Tolstoy, on the
      other hand, sought the salvation of mankind in a return to the primitive
      life and primitive Christian religion.
    

      The very first work of importance by Turgenev, A Sportsman’s
      Sketches, dealt with the question of serfdom, and it wielded
      tremendous influence in bringing about its abolition. Almost every
      succeeding book of his, from Rudin through Fathers and Sons
      to Virgin Soil, presented vivid pictures of contemporary Russian
      society, with its problems, the clash of ideas between the old and the new
      generations, and the struggles, the aspirations and the thoughts that
      engrossed the advanced youth of Russia; so that his collected works form a
      remarkable literary record of the successive movements of Russian society
      in a period of preparation, fraught with epochal significance, which
      culminated in the overthrow of Czarism and the inauguration of a new and
      true democracy, marking the beginning, perhaps, of a radical
      transformation the world over.
    

      “The greatest writer of Russia.” That is Turgenev’s
      estimate of Tolstoy. “A second Shakespeare!” was Flaubert’s
      enthusiastic outburst. The Frenchman’s comparison is not wholly
      illuminating. The one point of resemblance between the two authors is
      simply in the tremendous magnitude of their genius. Each is a Colossus.
      Each creates a whole world of characters, from kings and princes and
      ladies to servants and maids and peasants. But how vastly divergent the
      angle of approach! Anna Karenina may have all the subtle womanly charm of
      an Olivia or a Portia, but how different her trials. Shakespeare could not
      have treated Anna’s problems at all. Anna could not have appeared in
      his pages except as a sinning Gertrude, the mother of Hamlet. Shakespeare
      had all the prejudices of his age. He accepted the world as it is with its
      absurd moralities, its conventions and institutions and social classes. A
      gravedigger is naturally inferior to a lord, and if he is to be presented
      at all, he must come on as a clown. The people are always a mob, the
      rabble. Tolstoy, is the revolutionist, the iconoclast. He has the
      completest independence of mind. He utterly refuses to accept established
      opinions just because they are established. He probes into the right and
      wrong of things. His is a broad, generous universal democracy, his is a
      comprehensive sympathy, his an absolute incapacity to evaluate human
      beings according to station, rank or profession, or any standard but that
      of spiritual worth. In all this he was a complete contrast to Shakespeare.
      Each of the two men was like a creature of a higher world, possessed of
      supernatural endowments. Their omniscience of all things human, their
      insight into the hiddenmost springs of men’s actions appear
      miraculous. But Shakespeare makes the impression of detachment from his
      works. The works do not reveal the man; while in Tolstoy the greatness of
      the man blends with the greatness of the genius. Tolstoy was no mere
      oracle uttering profundities he wot not of. As the social, religious and
      moral tracts that he wrote in the latter period of his life are instinct
      with a literary beauty of which he never could divest himself, and which
      gave an artistic value even to his sermons, so his earlier novels show a
      profound concern for the welfare of society, a broad, humanitarian spirit,
      a bigness of soul that included prince and pauper alike.
    

      Is this extravagant praise? Then let me echo William Dean Howells: “I
      know very well that I do not speak of Tolstoy’s books in measured
      terms; I cannot.”
    

      The Russian writers so far considered have made valuable contributions to
      the short story; but, with the exception of Pushkin, whose reputation
      rests chiefly upon his poetry, their best work, generally, was in the
      field of the long novel. It was the novel that gave Russian literature its
      pre-eminence. It could not have been otherwise, since Russia is young as a
      literary nation, and did not come of age until the period at which the
      novel was almost the only form of literature that counted. If, therefore,
      Russia was to gain distinction in the world of letters, it could be only
      through the novel. Of the measure of her success there is perhaps no
      better testimony than the words of Matthew Arnold, a critic certainly not
      given to overstatement. “The Russian novel,” he wrote in 1887,
      “has now the vogue, and deserves to have it... The Russian novelist
      is master of a spell to which the secret of human nature—both what
      is external and internal, gesture and manner no less than thought and
      feeling—willingly make themselves known... In that form of
      imaginative literature, which in our day is the most popular and the most
      possible, the Russians at the present moment seem to me to hold the field.”
    

      With the strict censorship imposed on Russian writers, many of them who
      might perhaps have contented themselves with expressing their opinions in
      essays, were driven to conceal their meaning under the guise of satire or
      allegory; which gave rise to a peculiar genre of literature, a sort of
      editorial or essay done into fiction, in which the satirist Saltykov, a
      contemporary of Turgenev and Dostoyevsky, who wrote under the pseudonym of
      Shchedrin, achieved the greatest success and popularity.
    

      It was not however, until the concluding quarter of the last century that
      writers like Korolenko and Garshin arose, who devoted themselves chiefly
      to the cultivation of the short story. With Anton Chekhov the short story
      assumed a position of importance alongside the larger works of the great
      Russian masters. Gorky and Andreyev made the short story do the same
      service for the active revolutionary period in the last decade of the
      nineteenth century down to its temporary defeat in 1906 that Turgenev
      rendered in his series of larger novels for the period of preparation. But
      very different was the voice of Gorky, the man sprung from the people, the
      embodiment of all the accumulated wrath and indignation of centuries of
      social wrong and oppression, from the gentlemanly tones of the cultured
      artist Turgenev. Like a mighty hammer his blows fell upon the decaying
      fabric of the old society. His was no longer a feeble, despairing protest.
      With the strength and confidence of victory he made onslaught upon
      onslaught on the old institutions until they shook and almost tumbled. And
      when reaction celebrated its short-lived triumph and gloom settled again
      upon his country and most of his co-fighters withdrew from the battle in
      despair, some returning to the old-time Russian mood of hopelessness,
      passivity and apathy, and some even backsliding into wild orgies of
      literary debauchery, Gorky never wavered, never lost his faith and hope,
      never for a moment was untrue to his principles. Now, with the revolution
      victorious, he has come into his right, one of the most respected, beloved
      and picturesque figures in the Russian democracy.
    

      Kuprin, the most facile and talented short-story writer next to Chekhov,
      has, on the whole, kept well to the best literary traditions of Russia,
      though he has frequently wandered off to extravagant sex themes, for which
      he seems to display as great a fondness as Artzybashev. Semyonov is a
      unique character in Russian literature, a peasant who had scarcely
      mastered the most elementary mechanics of writing when he penned his first
      story. But that story pleased Tolstoy, who befriended and encouraged him.
      His tales deal altogether with peasant life in country and city, and have
      a lifelikeness, an artlessness, a simplicity striking even in a Russian
      author.
    

      There is a small group of writers detached from the main current of
      Russian literature who worship at the shrine of beauty and mysticism. Of
      these Sologub has attained the highest reputation.
    

      Rich as Russia has become in the short story, Anton Chekhov still stands
      out as the supreme master, one of the greatest short-story writers of the
      world. He was born in Taganarok, in the Ukraine, in 1860, the son of a
      peasant serf who succeeded in buying his freedom. Anton Chekhov studied
      medicine, but devoted himself largely to writing, in which, he
      acknowledged, his scientific training was of great service. Though he
      lived only forty-four years, dying of tuberculosis in 1904, his collected
      works consist of sixteen fair-sized volumes of short stories, and several
      dramas besides. A few volumes of his works have already appeared in
      English translation.
    

      Critics, among them Tolstoy, have often compared Chekhov to Maupassant. I
      find it hard to discover the resemblance. Maupassant holds a supreme
      position as a short-story writer; so does Chekhov. But there, it seems to
      me, the likeness ends.
    

      The chill wind that blows from the atmosphere created by the Frenchman’s
      objective artistry is by the Russian commingled with the warm breath of a
      great human sympathy. Maupassant never tells where his sympathies lie, and
      you don’t know; you only guess. Chekhov does not tell you where his
      sympathies lie, either, but you know all the same; you don’t have to
      guess. And yet Chekhov is as objective as Maupassant. In the chronicling
      of facts, conditions, and situations, in the reproduction of characters,
      he is scrupulously true, hard, and inexorable. But without obtruding his
      personality, he somehow manages to let you know that he is always present,
      always at hand. If you laugh, he is there to laugh with you; if you cry,
      he is there to shed a tear with you; if you are horrified, he is
      horrified, too. It is a subtle art by which he contrives to make one feel
      the nearness of himself for all his objectiveness, so subtle that it
      defies analysis. And yet it constitutes one of the great charms of his
      tales.
    

      Chekhov’s works show an astounding resourcefulness and versatility.
      There is no monotony, no repetition. Neither in incident nor in character
      are any two stories alike. The range of Chekhov’s knowledge of men
      and things seems to be unlimited, and he is extravagant in the use of it.
      Some great idea which many a writer would consider sufficient to expand
      into a whole novel he disposes of in a story of a few pages. Take, for
      example, Vanka, apparently but a mere episode in the childhood of a
      nine-year-old boy; while it is really the tragedy of a whole life in its
      tempting glimpses into a past environment and ominous forebodings of the
      future—all contracted into the space of four or five pages. Chekhov
      is lavish with his inventiveness. Apparently, it cost him no effort to
      invent.
    

      I have used the word inventiveness for lack of a better name. It expresses
      but lamely the peculiar faculty that distinguishes Chekhov. Chekhov does
      not really invent. He reveals. He reveals things that no author before him
      has revealed. It is as though he possessed a special organ which enabled
      him to see, hear and feel things of which we other mortals did not even
      dream the existence. Yet when he lays them bare we know that they are not
      fictitious, not invented, but as real as the ordinary familiar facts of
      life. This faculty of his playing on all conceivable objects, all
      conceivable emotions, no matter how microscopic, endows them with life and
      a soul. By virtue of this power The Steppe, an uneventful record of
      peasants travelling day after day through flat, monotonous fields, becomes
      instinct with dramatic interest, and its 125 pages seem all too short. And
      by virtue of the same attribute we follow with breathless suspense the
      minute description of the declining days of a great scientist, who feels
      his physical and mental faculties gradually ebbing away. A Tiresome
      Story, Chekhov calls it; and so it would be without the vitality
      conjured into it by the magic touch of this strange genius.
    

      Divination is perhaps a better term than invention. Chekhov divines the
      most secret impulses of the soul, scents out what is buried in the
      subconscious, and brings it up to the surface. Most writers are
      specialists. They know certain strata of society, and when they venture
      beyond, their step becomes uncertain. Chekhov’s material is only
      delimited by humanity. He is equally at home everywhere. The peasant, the
      labourer, the merchant, the priest, the professional man, the scholar, the
      military officer, and the government functionary, Gentile or Jew, man,
      woman, or child—Chekhov is intimate with all of them. His characters
      are sharply defined individuals, not types. In almost all his stories,
      however short, the men and women and children who play a part in them come
      out as clear, distinct personalities. Ariadne is as vivid a character as
      Lilly, the heroine of Sudermann’s Song of Songs; yet Ariadne
      is but a single story in a volume of stories. Who that has read The
      Darling can ever forget her—the woman who had no separate
      existence of her own, but thought the thoughts, felt the feelings, and
      spoke the words of the men she loved? And when there was no man to love
      any more, she was utterly crushed until she found a child to take care of
      and to love; and then she sank her personality in the boy as she had sunk
      it before in her husbands and lover, became a mere reflection of him, and
      was happy again.
    

      In the compilation of this volume I have been guided by the desire to give
      the largest possible representation to the prominent authors of the
      Russian short story, and to present specimens characteristic of each. At
      the same time the element of interest has been kept in mind; and in a few
      instances, as in the case of Korolenko, the selection of the story was
      made with a view to its intrinsic merit and striking qualities rather than
      as typifying the writer’s art. It was, of course, impossible in the
      space of one book to exhaust all that is best. But to my knowledge, the
      present volume is the most comprehensive anthology of the Russian short
      story in the English language, and gives a fair notion of the achievement
      in that field. All who enjoy good reading, I have no reason to doubt, will
      get pleasure from it, and if, in addition, it will prove of assistance to
      American students of Russian literature, I shall feel that the task has
      been doubly worth the while.
    

      Korolenko’s Shades and Andreyev’s Lazarus first
      appeared in Current Opinion, and Artzybashev’s The
      Revolutionist in the Metropolitan Magazine. I take pleasure in
      thanking Mr. Edward J. Wheeler, editor of Current Opinion, and Mr.
      Carl Hovey, editor of the Metropolitan Magazine, for permission to
      reprint them.
    

      [Signature: Thomas Seltzer]
    

      “Everything is subordinated to two main requirements—humanitarian
      ideals and fidelity to life. This is the secret of the marvellous
      simplicity of Russian literary art.”—THOMAS SELTZER.
    











      BEST RUSSIAN SHORT STORIES
    











      THE QUEEN OF SPADES
    

      BY ALEXSANDR S. PUSHKIN
    

      I
    

There was a card
      party at the rooms of Narumov of the Horse Guards. The long winter night
      passed away imperceptibly, and it was five o’clock in the morning
      before the company sat down to supper. Those who had won, ate with a good
      appetite; the others sat staring absently at their empty plates. When the
      champagne appeared, however, the conversation became more animated, and
      all took a part in it.
    

      “And how did you fare, Surin?” asked the host.
    

      “Oh, I lost, as usual. I must confess that I am unlucky: I play
      mirandole, I always keep cool, I never allow anything to put me out, and
      yet I always lose!”
    

      “And you did not once allow yourself to be tempted to back the
      red?... Your firmness astonishes me.”
    

      “But what do you think of Hermann?” said one of the guests,
      pointing to a young Engineer: “he has never had a card in his hand
      in his life, he has never in his life laid a wager, and yet he sits here
      till five o’clock in the morning watching our play.”
    

      “Play interests me very much,” said Hermann: “but I am
      not in the position to sacrifice the necessary in the hope of winning the
      superfluous.”
    

      “Hermann is a German: he is economical—that is all!”
      observed Tomsky. “But if there is one person that I cannot
      understand, it is my grandmother, the Countess Anna Fedotovna.”
    

      “How so?” inquired the guests.
    

      “I cannot understand,” continued Tomsky, “how it is that
      my grandmother does not punt.”
    

      “What is there remarkable about an old lady of eighty not punting?”
      said Narumov.
    

      “Then you do not know the reason why?”
    

      “No, really; haven’t the faintest idea.”
    

      “Oh! then listen. About sixty years ago, my grandmother went to
      Paris, where she created quite a sensation. People used to run after her
      to catch a glimpse of the ‘Muscovite Venus.’ Richelieu made
      love to her, and my grandmother maintains that he almost blew out his
      brains in consequence of her cruelty. At that time ladies used to play at
      faro. On one occasion at the Court, she lost a very considerable sum to
      the Duke of Orleans. On returning home, my grandmother removed the patches
      from her face, took off her hoops, informed my grandfather of her loss at
      the gaming-table, and ordered him to pay the money. My deceased
      grandfather, as far as I remember, was a sort of house-steward to my
      grandmother. He dreaded her like fire; but, on hearing of such a heavy
      loss, he almost went out of his mind; he calculated the various sums she
      had lost, and pointed out to her that in six months she had spent half a
      million francs, that neither their Moscow nor Saratov estates were in
      Paris, and finally refused point blank to pay the debt. My grandmother
      gave him a box on the ear and slept by herself as a sign of her
      displeasure. The next day she sent for her husband, hoping that this
      domestic punishment had produced an effect upon him, but she found him
      inflexible. For the first time in her life, she entered into reasonings
      and explanations with him, thinking to be able to convince him by pointing
      out to him that there are debts and debts, and that there is a great
      difference between a Prince and a coachmaker. But it was all in vain, my
      grandfather still remained obdurate. But the matter did not rest there. My
      grandmother did not know what to do. She had shortly before become
      acquainted with a very remarkable man. You have heard of Count St.
      Germain, about whom so many marvellous stories are told. You know that he
      represented himself as the Wandering Jew, as the discoverer of the elixir
      of life, of the philosopher’s stone, and so forth. Some laughed at
      him as a charlatan; but Casanova, in his memoirs, says that he was a spy.
      But be that as it may, St. Germain, in spite of the mystery surrounding
      him, was a very fascinating person, and was much sought after in the best
      circles of society. Even to this day my grandmother retains an
      affectionate recollection of him, and becomes quite angry if any one
      speaks disrespectfully of him. My grandmother knew that St. Germain had
      large sums of money at his disposal. She resolved to have recourse to him,
      and she wrote a letter to him asking him to come to her without delay. The
      queer old man immediately waited upon her and found her overwhelmed with
      grief. She described to him in the blackest colours the barbarity of her
      husband, and ended by declaring that her whole hope depended upon his
      friendship and amiability.
    

      “St. Germain reflected.
    

      “‘I could advance you the sum you want,’ said he;
      ‘but I know that you would not rest easy until you had paid me back,
      and I should not like to bring fresh troubles upon you. But there is
      another way of getting out of your difficulty: you can win back your
      money.’
    

      “‘But, my dear Count,’ replied my grandmother, ‘I
      tell you that I haven’t any money left.’
    

      “‘Money is not necessary,’ replied St. Germain: ‘be
      pleased to listen to me.’
    

      “Then he revealed to her a secret, for which each of us would give a
      good deal...”
    

      The young officers listened with increased attention. Tomsky lit his pipe,
      puffed away for a moment and then continued:
    

      “That same evening my grandmother went to Versailles to the jeu
      de la reine. The Duke of Orleans kept the bank; my grandmother excused
      herself in an off-hand manner for not having yet paid her debt, by
      inventing some little story, and then began to play against him. She chose
      three cards and played them one after the other: all three won sonika,
      [Said of a card when it wins or loses in the quickest possible time.] and
      my grandmother recovered every farthing that she had lost.”
    

      “Mere chance!” said one of the guests.
    

      “A tale!” observed Hermann.
    

      “Perhaps they were marked cards!” said a third.
    

      “I do not think so,” replied Tomsky gravely.
    

      “What!” said Narumov, “you have a grandmother who knows
      how to hit upon three lucky cards in succession, and you have never yet
      succeeded in getting the secret of it out of her?”
    

      “That’s the deuce of it!” replied Tomsky: “she had
      four sons, one of whom was my father; all four were determined gamblers,
      and yet not to one of them did she ever reveal her secret, although it
      would not have been a bad thing either for them or for me. But this is
      what I heard from my uncle, Count Ivan Ilyich, and he assured me, on his
      honour, that it was true. The late Chaplitzky—the same who died in
      poverty after having squandered millions—once lost, in his youth,
      about three hundred thousand roubles—to Zorich, if I remember
      rightly. He was in despair. My grandmother, who was always very severe
      upon the extravagance of young men, took pity, however, upon Chaplitzky.
      She gave him three cards, telling him to play them one after the other, at
      the same time exacting from him a solemn promise that he would never play
      at cards again as long as he lived. Chaplitzky then went to his victorious
      opponent, and they began a fresh game. On the first card he staked fifty
      thousand rubles and won sonika; he doubled the stake and won again,
      till at last, by pursuing the same tactics, he won back more than he had
      lost ...
    

      “But it is time to go to bed: it is a quarter to six already.”
    

      And indeed it was already beginning to dawn: the young men emptied their
      glasses and then took leave of each other.
    

      II
    

The old Countess A——
      was seated in her dressing-room in front of her looking—glass. Three
      waiting maids stood around her. One held a small pot of rouge, another a
      box of hair-pins, and the third a tall can with bright red ribbons. The
      Countess had no longer the slightest pretensions to beauty, but she still
      preserved the habits of her youth, dressed in strict accordance with the
      fashion of seventy years before, and made as long and as careful a
      toilette as she would have done sixty years previously. Near the window,
      at an embroidery frame, sat a young lady, her ward.
    

      “Good morning, grandmamma,” said a young officer, entering the
      room. “Bonjour, Mademoiselle Lise. Grandmamma, I want to ask
      you something.”
    

      “What is it, Paul?”
    

      “I want you to let me introduce one of my friends to you, and to
      allow me to bring him to the ball on Friday.”
    

      “Bring him direct to the ball and introduce him to me there. Were
      you at B——‘s yesterday?”
    

      “Yes; everything went off very pleasantly, and dancing was kept up
      until five o’clock. How charming Yeletzkaya was!”
    

      “But, my dear, what is there charming about her? Isn’t she
      like her grandmother, the Princess Daria Petrovna? By the way, she must be
      very old, the Princess Daria Petrovna.”
    

      “How do you mean, old?” cried Tomsky thoughtlessly; “she
      died seven years ago.”
    

      The young lady raised her head and made a sign to the young officer. He
      then remembered that the old Countess was never to be informed of the
      death of any of her contemporaries, and he bit his lips. But the old
      Countess heard the news with the greatest indifference.
    

      “Dead!” said she; “and I did not know it. We were
      appointed maids of honour at the same time, and when we were presented to
      the Empress...”
    

      And the Countess for the hundredth time related to her grandson one of her
      anecdotes.
    

      “Come, Paul,” said she, when she had finished her story,
      “help me to get up. Lizanka, where is my snuff-box?”
    

      And the Countess with her three maids went behind a screen to finish her
      toilette. Tomsky was left alone with the young lady.
    

      “Who is the gentleman you wish to introduce to the Countess?”
      asked Lizaveta Ivanovna in a whisper.
    

      “Narumov. Do you know him?”
    

      “No. Is he a soldier or a civilian?”
    

      “A soldier.”
    

      “Is he in the Engineers?”
    

      “No, in the Cavalry. What made you think that he was in the
      Engineers?”
    

      The young lady smiled, but made no reply.
    

      “Paul,” cried the Countess from behind the screen, “send
      me some new novel, only pray don’t let it be one of the present day
      style.”
    

      “What do you mean, grandmother?”
    

      “That is, a novel, in which the hero strangles neither his father
      nor his mother, and in which there are no drowned bodies. I have a great
      horror of drowned persons.”
    

      “There are no such novels nowadays. Would you like a Russian one?”
    

      “Are there any Russian novels? Send me one, my dear, pray send me
      one!”
    

      “Good-bye, grandmother: I am in a hurry... Good-bye, Lizaveta
      Ivanovna. What made you think that Narumov was in the Engineers?”
    

      And Tomsky left the boudoir.
    

      Lizaveta Ivanovna was left alone: she laid aside her work and began to
      look out of the window. A few moments afterwards, at a corner house on the
      other side of the street, a young officer appeared. A deep blush covered
      her cheeks; she took up her work again and bent her head down over the
      frame. At the same moment the Countess returned completely dressed.
    

      “Order the carriage, Lizaveta,” said she; “we will go
      out for a drive.”
    

      Lizaveta arose from the frame and began to arrange her work.
    

      “What is the matter with you, my child, are you deaf?” cried
      the Countess. “Order the carriage to be got ready at once.”
    

      “I will do so this moment,” replied the young lady, hastening
      into the ante-room.
    

      A servant entered and gave the Countess some books from Prince Paul
      Aleksandrovich.
    

      “Tell him that I am much obliged to him,” said the Countess.
      “Lizaveta! Lizaveta! Where are you running to?”
    

      “I am going to dress.”
    

      “There is plenty of time, my dear. Sit down here. Open the first
      volume and read to me aloud.”
    

      Her companion took the book and read a few lines.
    

      “Louder,” said the Countess. “What is the matter with
      you, my child? Have you lost your voice? Wait—give me that footstool—a
      little nearer—that will do.”
    

      Lizaveta read two more pages. The Countess yawned.
    

      “Put the book down,” said she: “what a lot of nonsense!
      Send it back to Prince Paul with my thanks... But where is the carriage?”
    

      “The carriage is ready,” said Lizaveta, looking out into the
      street.
    

      “How is it that you are not dressed?” said the Countess:
      “I must always wait for you. It is intolerable, my dear!”
    

      Liza hastened to her room. She had not been there two minutes, before the
      Countess began to ring with all her might. The three waiting-maids came
      running in at one door and the valet at another.
    

      “How is it that you cannot hear me when I ring for you?” said
      the Countess. “Tell Lizaveta Ivanovna that I am waiting for her.”
    

      Lizaveta returned with her hat and cloak on.
    

      “At last you are here!” said the Countess. “But why such
      an elaborate toilette? Whom do you intend to captivate? What sort of
      weather is it? It seems rather windy.”
    

      “No, your Ladyship, it is very calm,” replied the valet.
    

      “You never think of what you are talking about. Open the window. So
      it is: windy and bitterly cold. Unharness the horses. Lizaveta, we won’t
      go out—there was no need for you to deck yourself like that.”
    

      “What a life is mine!” thought Lizaveta Ivanovna.
    

      And, in truth, Lizaveta Ivanovna was a very unfortunate creature. “The
      bread of the stranger is bitter,” says Dante, “and his
      staircase hard to climb.” But who can know what the bitterness of
      dependence is so well as the poor companion of an old lady of quality? The
      Countess A—— had by no means a bad heart, but she was
      capricious, like a woman who had been spoilt by the world, as well as
      being avaricious and egotistical, like all old people who have seen their
      best days, and whose thoughts are with the past and not the present. She
      participated in all the vanities of the great world, went to balls, where
      she sat in a corner, painted and dressed in old-fashioned style, like a
      deformed but indispensable ornament of the ball-room; all the guests on
      entering approached her and made a profound bow, as if in accordance with
      a set ceremony, but after that nobody took any further notice of her. She
      received the whole town at her house, and observed the strictest
      etiquette, although she could no longer recognise the faces of people. Her
      numerous domestics, growing fat and old in her ante-chamber and servants’
      hall, did just as they liked, and vied with each other in robbing the aged
      Countess in the most bare-faced manner. Lizaveta Ivanovna was the martyr
      of the household. She made tea, and was reproached with using too much
      sugar; she read novels aloud to the Countess, and the faults of the author
      were visited upon her head; she accompanied the Countess in her walks, and
      was held answerable for the weather or the state of the pavement. A salary
      was attached to the post, but she very rarely received it, although she
      was expected to dress like everybody else, that is to say, like very few
      indeed. In society she played the most pitiable role. Everybody knew her,
      and nobody paid her any attention. At balls she danced only when a partner
      was wanted, and ladies would only take hold of her arm when it was
      necessary to lead her out of the room to attend to their dresses. She was
      very self-conscious, and felt her position keenly, and she looked about
      her with impatience for a deliverer to come to her rescue; but the young
      men, calculating in their giddiness, honoured her with but very little
      attention, although Lizaveta Ivanovna was a hundred times prettier than
      the bare-faced and cold-hearted marriageable girls around whom they
      hovered. Many a time did she quietly sFlink away from the glittering but
      wearisome drawing-room, to go and cry in her own poor little room, in
      which stood a screen, a chest of drawers, a looking-glass and a painted
      bedstead, and where a tallow candle burnt feebly in a copper candle-stick.
    

      One morning—this was about two days after the evening party
      described at the beginning of this story, and a week previous to the scene
      at which we have just assisted—Lizaveta Ivanovna was seated near the
      window at her embroidery frame, when, happening to look out into the
      street, she caught sight of a young Engineer officer, standing motionless
      with his eyes fixed upon her window. She lowered her head and went on
      again with her work. About five minutes afterwards she looked out again—the
      young officer was still standing in the same place. Not being in the habit
      of coquetting with passing officers, she did not continue to gaze out into
      the street, but went on sewing for a couple of hours, without raising her
      head. Dinner was announced. She rose up and began to put her embroidery
      away, but glancing casually out of the window, she perceived the officer
      again. This seemed to her very strange. After dinner she went to the
      window with a certain feeling of uneasiness, but the officer was no longer
      there—and she thought no more about him.
    

      A couple of days afterwards, just as she was stepping into the carriage
      with the Countess, she saw him again. He was standing close behind the
      door, with his face half-concealed by his fur collar, but his dark eyes
      sparkled beneath his cap. Lizaveta felt alarmed, though she knew not why,
      and she trembled as she seated herself in the carriage.
    

      On returning home, she hastened to the window—the officer was
      standing in his accustomed place, with his eyes fixed upon her. She drew
      back, a prey to curiosity and agitated by a feeling which was quite new to
      her.
    

      From that time forward not a day passed without the young officer making
      his appearance under the window at the customary hour, and between him and
      her there was established a sort of mute acquaintance. Sitting in her
      place at work, she used to feel his approach; and raising her head, she
      would look at him longer and longer each day. The young man seemed to be
      very grateful to her: she saw with the sharp eye of youth, how a sudden
      flush covered his pale cheeks each time that their glances met. After
      about a week she commenced to smile at him...
    

      When Tomsky asked permission of his grandmother the Countess to present
      one of his friends to her, the young girl’s heart beat violently.
      But hearing that Narumov was not an Engineer, she regretted that by her
      thoughtless question, she had betrayed her secret to the volatile Tomsky.
    

      Hermann was the son of a German who had become a naturalised Russian, and
      from whom he had inherited a small capital. Being firmly convinced of the
      necessity of preserving his independence, Hermann did not touch his
      private income, but lived on his pay, without allowing himself the
      slightest luxury. Moreover, he was reserved and ambitious, and his
      companions rarely had an opportunity of making merry at the expense of his
      extreme parsimony. He had strong passions and an ardent imagination, but
      his firmness of disposition preserved him from the ordinary errors of
      young men. Thus, though a gamester at heart, he never touched a card, for
      he considered his position did not allow him—as he said—“to
      risk the necessary in the hope of winning the superfluous,” yet he
      would sit for nights together at the card table and follow with feverish
      anxiety the different turns of the game.
    

      The story of the three cards had produced a powerful impression upon his
      imagination, and all night long he could think of nothing else. “If,”
      he thought to himself the following evening, as he walked along the
      streets of St. Petersburg, “if the old Countess would but reveal her
      secret to me! if she would only tell me the names of the three winning
      cards. Why should I not try my fortune? I must get introduced to her and
      win her favour—become her lover... But all that will take time, and
      she is eighty-seven years old: she might be dead in a week, in a couple of
      days even!... But the story itself: can it really be true?... No! Economy,
      temperance and industry: those are my three winning cards; by means of
      them I shall be able to double my capital—increase it sevenfold, and
      procure for myself ease and independence.”
    

      Musing in this manner, he walked on until he found himself in one of the
      principal streets of St. Petersburg, in front of a house of antiquated
      architecture. The street was blocked with equipages; carriages one after
      the other drew up in front of the brilliantly illuminated doorway. At one
      moment there stepped out on to the pavement the well-shaped little foot of
      some young beauty, at another the heavy boot of a cavalry officer, and
      then the silk stockings and shoes of a member of the diplomatic world.
      Furs and cloaks passed in rapid succession before the gigantic porter at
      the entrance.
    

      Hermann stopped. “Whose house is this?” he asked of the
      watchman at the corner.
    

      “The Countess A——‘s,” replied the watchman.
    

      Hermann started. The strange story of the three cards again presented
      itself to his imagination. He began walking up and down before the house,
      thinking of its owner and her strange secret. Returning late to his modest
      lodging, he could not go to sleep for a long time, and when at last he did
      doze off, he could dream of nothing but cards, green tables, piles of
      banknotes and heaps of ducats. He played one card after the other, winning
      uninterruptedly, and then he gathered up the gold and filled his pockets
      with the notes. When he woke up late the next morning, he sighed over the
      loss of his imaginary wealth, and then sallying out into the town, he
      found himself once more in front of the Countess’s residence. Some
      unknown power seemed to have attracted him thither. He stopped and looked
      up at the windows. At one of these he saw a head with luxuriant black
      hair, which was bent down probably over some book or an embroidery frame.
      The head was raised. Hermann saw a fresh complexion and a pair of dark
      eyes. That moment decided his fate.
    

      III
    

Lizaveta Ivanovna
      had scarcely taken off her hat and cloak, when the Countess sent for her
      and again ordered her to get the carriage ready. The vehicle drew up
      before the door, and they prepared to take their seats. Just at the moment
      when two footmen were assisting the old lady to enter the carriage,
      Lizaveta saw her Engineer standing close beside the wheel; he grasped her
      hand; alarm caused her to lose her presence of mind, and the young man
      disappeared—but not before he had left a letter between her fingers.
      She concealed it in her glove, and during the whole of the drive she
      neither saw nor heard anything. It was the custom of the Countess, when
      out for an airing in her carriage, to be constantly asking such questions
      as: “Who was that person that met us just now? What is the name of
      this bridge? What is written on that signboard?” On this occasion,
      however, Lizaveta returned such vague and absurd answers, that the
      Countess became angry with her.
    

      “What is the matter with you, my dear?” she exclaimed. “Have
      you taken leave of your senses, or what is it? Do you not hear me or
      understand what I say?... Heaven be thanked, I am still in my right mind
      and speak plainly enough!”
    

      Lizaveta Ivanovna did not hear her. On returning home she ran to her room,
      and drew the letter out of her glove: it was not sealed. Lizaveta read it.
      The letter contained a declaration of love; it was tender, respectful, and
      copied word for word from a German novel. But Lizaveta did not know
      anything of the German language, and she was quite delighted.
    

      For all that, the letter caused her to feel exceedingly uneasy. For the
      first time in her life she was entering into secret and confidential
      relations with a young man. His boldness alarmed her. She reproached
      herself for her imprudent behaviour, and knew not what to do. Should she
      cease to sit at the window and, by assuming an appearance of indifference
      towards him, put a check upon the young officer’s desire for further
      acquaintance with her? Should she send his letter back to him, or should
      she answer him in a cold and decided manner? There was nobody to whom she
      could turn in her perplexity, for she had neither female friend nor
      adviser... At length she resolved to reply to him.
    

      She sat down at her little writing-table, took pen and paper, and began to
      think. Several times she began her letter, and then tore it up: the way
      she had expressed herself seemed to her either too inviting or too cold
      and decisive. At last she succeeded in writing a few lines with which she
      felt satisfied.
    

      “I am convinced,” she wrote, “that your intentions are
      honourable, and that you do not wish to offend me by any imprudent
      behaviour, but our acquaintance must not begin in such a manner. I return
      you your letter, and I hope that I shall never have any cause to complain
      of this undeserved slight.”
    

      The next day, as soon as Hermann made his appearance, Lizaveta rose from
      her embroidery, went into the drawing-room, opened the ventilator and
      threw the letter into the street, trusting that the young officer would
      have the perception to pick it up.
    

      Hermann hastened forward, picked it up and then repaired to a confectioner’s
      shop. Breaking the seal of the envelope, he found inside it his own letter
      and Lizaveta’s reply. He had expected this, and he returned home,
      his mind deeply occupied with his intrigue.
    

      Three days afterwards, a bright-eyed young girl from a milliner’s
      establishment brought Lizaveta a letter. Lizaveta opened it with great
      uneasiness, fearing that it was a demand for money, when suddenly she
      recognised Hermann’s hand-writing.
    

      “You have made a mistake, my dear,” said she: “this
      letter is not for me.”
    

      “Oh, yes, it is for you,” replied the girl, smiling very
      knowingly. “Have the goodness to read it.”
    

      Lizaveta glanced at the letter. Hermann requested an interview.
    

      “It cannot be,” she cried, alarmed at the audacious request,
      and the manner in which it was made. “This letter is certainly not
      for me.”
    

      And she tore it into fragments.
    

      “If the letter was not for you, why have you torn it up?” said
      the girl. “I should have given it back to the person who sent it.”
    

      “Be good enough, my dear,” said Lizaveta, disconcerted by this
      remark, “not to bring me any more letters for the future, and tell
      the person who sent you that he ought to be ashamed...”
    

      But Hermann was not the man to be thus put off. Every day Lizaveta
      received from him a letter, sent now in this way, now in that. They were
      no longer translated from the German. Hermann wrote them under the
      inspiration of passion, and spoke in his own language, and they bore full
      testimony to the inflexibility of his desire and the disordered condition
      of his uncontrollable imagination. Lizaveta no longer thought of sending
      them back to him: she became intoxicated with them and began to reply to
      them, and little by little her answers became longer and more
      affectionate. At last she threw out of the window to him the following
      letter:
    

      “This evening there is going to be a ball at the Embassy. The
      Countess will be there. We shall remain until two o’clock. You have
      now an opportunity of seeing me alone. As soon as the Countess is gone,
      the servants will very probably go out, and there will be nobody left but
      the Swiss, but he usually goes to sleep in his lodge. Come about half-past
      eleven. Walk straight upstairs. If you meet anybody in the ante-room, ask
      if the Countess is at home. You will be told ‘No,’ in which
      case there will be nothing left for you to do but to go away again. But it
      is most probable that you will meet nobody. The maidservants will all be
      together in one room. On leaving the ante-room, turn to the left, and walk
      straight on until you reach the Countess’s bedroom. In the bedroom,
      behind a screen, you will find two doors: the one on the right leads to a
      cabinet, which the Countess never enters; the one on the left leads to a
      corridor, at the end of which is a little winding staircase; this leads to
      my room.”
    

      Hermann trembled like a tiger, as he waited for the appointed time to
      arrive. At ten o’clock in the evening he was already in front of the
      Countess’s house. The weather was terrible; the wind blew with great
      violence; the sleety snow fell in large flakes; the lamps emitted a feeble
      light, the streets were deserted; from time to time a sledge, drawn by a
      sorry-looking hack, passed by, on the look-out for a belated passenger.
      Hermann was enveloped in a thick overcoat, and felt neither wind nor snow.
    

      At last the Countess’s carriage drew up. Hermann saw two footmen
      carry out in their arms the bent form of the old lady, wrapped in sable
      fur, and immediately behind her, clad in a warm mantle, and with her head
      ornamented with a wreath of fresh flowers, followed Lizaveta. The door was
      closed. The carriage rolled away heavily through the yielding snow. The
      porter shut the street-door; the windows became dark.
    

      Hermann began walking up and down near the deserted house; at length he
      stopped under a lamp, and glanced at his watch: it was twenty minutes past
      eleven. He remained standing under the lamp, his eyes fixed upon the
      watch, impatiently waiting for the remaining minutes to pass. At half-past
      eleven precisely, Hermann ascended the steps of the house, and made his
      way into the brightly-illuminated vestibule. The porter was not there.
      Hermann hastily ascended the staircase, opened the door of the ante-room
      and saw a footman sitting asleep in an antique chair by the side of a
      lamp. With a light firm step Hermann passed by him. The drawing-room and
      dining-room were in darkness, but a feeble reflection penetrated thither
      from the lamp in the ante-room.
    

      Hermann reached the Countess’s bedroom. Before a shrine, which was
      full of old images, a golden lamp was burning. Faded stuffed chairs and
      divans with soft cushions stood in melancholy symmetry around the room,
      the walls of which were hung with China silk. On one side of the room hung
      two portraits painted in Paris by Madame Lebrun. One of these represented
      a stout, red-faced man of about forty years of age in a bright-green
      uniform and with a star upon his breast; the other—a beautiful young
      woman, with an aquiline nose, forehead curls and a rose in her powdered
      hair. In the corners stood porcelain shepherds and shepherdesses,
      dining-room clocks from the workshop of the celebrated Lefroy, bandboxes,
      roulettes, fans and the various playthings for the amusement of ladies
      that were in vogue at the end of the last century, when Montgolfier’s
      balloons and Mesmer’s magnetism were the rage. Hermann stepped
      behind the screen. At the back of it stood a little iron bedstead; on the
      right was the door which led to the cabinet; on the left—the other
      which led to the corridor. He opened the latter, and saw the little
      winding staircase which led to the room of the poor companion... But he
      retraced his steps and entered the dark cabinet.
    

      The time passed slowly. All was still. The clock in the drawing-room
      struck twelve; the strokes echoed through the room one after the other,
      and everything was quiet again. Hermann stood leaning against the cold
      stove. He was calm; his heart beat regularly, like that of a man resolved
      upon a dangerous but inevitable undertaking. One o’clock in the
      morning struck; then two; and he heard the distant noise of
      carriage-wheels. An involuntary agitation took possession of him. The
      carriage drew near and stopped. He heard the sound of the carriage-steps
      being let down. All was bustle within the house. The servants were running
      hither and thither, there was a confusion of voices, and the rooms were
      lit up. Three antiquated chamber-maids entered the bedroom, and they were
      shortly afterwards followed by the Countess who, more dead than alive,
      sank into a Voltaire armchair. Hermann peeped through a chink. Lizaveta
      Ivanovna passed close by him, and he heard her hurried steps as she
      hastened up the little spiral staircase. For a moment his heart was
      assailed by something like a pricking of conscience, but the emotion was
      only transitory, and his heart became petrified as before.
    

      The Countess began to undress before her looking-glass. Her rose-bedecked
      cap was taken off, and then her powdered wig was removed from off her
      white and closely-cut hair. Hairpins fell in showers around her. Her
      yellow satin dress, brocaded with silver, fell down at her swollen feet.
    

      Hermann was a witness of the repugnant mysteries of her toilette; at last
      the Countess was in her night-cap and dressing-gown, and in this costume,
      more suitable to her age, she appeared less hideous and deformed.
    

      Like all old people in general, the Countess suffered from sleeplessness.
      Having undressed, she seated herself at the window in a Voltaire armchair
      and dismissed her maids. The candles were taken away, and once more the
      room was left with only one lamp burning in it. The Countess sat there
      looking quite yellow, mumbling with her flaccid lips and swaying to and
      fro. Her dull eyes expressed complete vacancy of mind, and, looking at
      her, one would have thought that the rocking of her body was not a
      voluntary action of her own, but was produced by the action of some
      concealed galvanic mechanism.
    

      Suddenly the death-like face assumed an inexplicable expression. The lips
      ceased to tremble, the eyes became animated: before the Countess stood an
      unknown man.
    

      “Do not be alarmed, for Heaven’s sake, do not be alarmed!”
      said he in a low but distinct voice. “I have no intention of doing
      you any harm, I have only come to ask a favour of you.”
    

      The old woman looked at him in silence, as if she had not heard what he
      had said. Hermann thought that she was deaf, and bending down towards her
      ear, he repeated what he had said. The aged Countess remained silent as
      before.
    

      “You can insure the happiness of my life,” continued Hermann,
      “and it will cost you nothing. I know that you can name three cards
      in order—”
    

      Hermann stopped. The Countess appeared now to understand what he wanted;
      she seemed as if seeking for words to reply.
    

      “It was a joke,” she replied at last: “I assure you it
      was only a joke.”
    

      “There is no joking about the matter,” replied Hermann
      angrily. “Remember Chaplitzky, whom you helped to win.”
    

      The Countess became visibly uneasy. Her features expressed strong emotion,
      but they quickly resumed their former immobility.
    

      “Can you not name me these three winning cards?” continued
      Hermann.
    

      The Countess remained silent; Hermann continued:
    

      “For whom are you preserving your secret? For your grandsons? They
      are rich enough without it; they do not know the worth of money. Your
      cards would be of no use to a spendthrift. He who cannot preserve his
      paternal inheritance, will die in want, even though he had a demon at his
      service. I am not a man of that sort; I know the value of money. Your
      three cards will not be thrown away upon me. Come!”...
    

      He paused and tremblingly awaited her reply. The Countess remained silent;
      Hermann fell upon his knees.
    

      “If your heart has ever known the feeling of love,” said he,
      “if you remember its rapture, if you have ever smiled at the cry of
      your new-born child, if any human feeling has ever entered into your
      breast, I entreat you by the feelings of a wife, a lover, a mother, by all
      that is most sacred in life, not to reject my prayer. Reveal to me your
      secret. Of what use is it to you?... May be it is connected with some
      terrible sin with the loss of eternal salvation, with some bargain with
      the devil... Reflect,—you are old; you have not long to live—I
      am ready to take your sins upon my soul. Only reveal to me your secret.
      Remember that the happiness of a man is in your hands, that not only I,
      but my children, and grandchildren will bless your memory and reverence
      you as a saint...”
    

      The old Countess answered not a word.
    

      Hermann rose to his feet.
    

      “You old hag!” he exclaimed, grinding his teeth, “then I
      will make you answer!”
    

      With these words he drew a pistol from his pocket.
    

      At the sight of the pistol, the Countess for the second time exhibited
      strong emotion. She shook her head and raised her hands as if to protect
      herself from the shot... then she fell backwards and remained motionless.
    

      “Come, an end to this childish nonsense!” said Hermann, taking
      hold of her hand. “I ask you for the last time: will you tell me the
      names of your three cards, or will you not?”
    

      The Countess made no reply. Hermann perceived that she was dead!
    

      IV
    

Lizaveta Ivanovna
      was sitting in her room, still in her ball dress, lost in deep thought. On
      returning home, she had hastily dismissed the chambermaid who very
      reluctantly came forward to assist her, saying that she would undress
      herself, and with a trembling heart had gone up to her own room, expecting
      to find Hermann there, but yet hoping not to find him. At the first glance
      she convinced herself that he was not there, and she thanked her fate for
      having prevented him keeping the appointment. She sat down without
      undressing, and began to recall to mind all the circumstances which in so
      short a time had carried her so far. It was not three weeks since the time
      when she first saw the young officer from the window—and yet she was
      already in correspondence with him, and he had succeeded in inducing her
      to grant him a nocturnal interview! She knew his name only through his
      having written it at the bottom of some of his letters; she had never
      spoken to him, had never heard his voice, and had never heard him spoken
      of until that evening. But, strange to say, that very evening at the ball,
      Tomsky, being piqued with the young Princess Pauline N——, who,
      contrary to her usual custom, did not flirt with him, wished to revenge
      himself by assuming an air of indifference: he therefore engaged Lizaveta
      Ivanovna and danced an endless mazurka with her. During the whole of the
      time he kept teasing her about her partiality for Engineer officers; he
      assured her that he knew far more than she imagined, and some of his jests
      were so happily aimed, that Lizaveta thought several times that her secret
      was known to him.
    

      “From whom have you learnt all this?” she asked, smiling.
    

      “From a friend of a person very well known to you,” replied
      Tomsky, “from a very distinguished man.”
    

      “And who is this distinguished man?”
    

      “His name is Hermann.”
    

      Lizaveta made no reply; but her hands and feet lost all sense of feeling.
    

      “This Hermann,” continued Tomsky, “is a man of romantic
      personality. He has the profile of a Napoleon, and the soul of a
      Mephistopheles. I believe that he has at least three crimes upon his
      conscience... How pale you have become!”
    

      “I have a headache... But what did this Hermann—or whatever
      his name is—tell you?”
    

      “Hermann is very much dissatisfied with his friend: he says that in
      his place he would act very differently... I even think that Hermann
      himself has designs upon you; at least, he listens very attentively to all
      that his friend has to say about you.”
    

      “And where has he seen me?”
    

      “In church, perhaps; or on the parade—God alone knows where.
      It may have been in your room, while you were asleep, for there is nothing
      that he—”
    

      Three ladies approaching him with the question: “oubli ou regret?”
      interrupted the conversation, which had become so tantalisingly
      interesting to Lizaveta.
    

      The lady chosen by Tomsky was the Princess Pauline herself. She succeeded
      in effecting a reconciliation with him during the numerous turns of the
      dance, after which he conducted her to her chair. On returning to his
      place, Tomsky thought no more either of Hermann or Lizaveta. She longed to
      renew the interrupted conversation, but the mazurka came to an end, and
      shortly afterwards the old Countess took her departure.
    

      Tomsky’s words were nothing more than the customary small talk of
      the dance, but they sank deep into the soul of the young dreamer. The
      portrait, sketched by Tomsky, coincided with the picture she had formed
      within her own mind, and thanks to the latest romances, the ordinary
      countenance of her admirer became invested with attributes capable of
      alarming her and fascinating her imagination at the same time. She was now
      sitting with her bare arms crossed and with her head, still adorned with
      flowers, sunk upon her uncovered bosom. Suddenly the door opened and
      Hermann entered. She shuddered.
    

      “Where were you?” she asked in a terrified whisper.
    

      “In the old Countess’s bedroom,” replied Hermann:
      “I have just left her. The Countess is dead.”
    

      “My God! What do you say?”
    

      “And I am afraid,” added Hermann, “that I am the cause
      of her death.”
    

      Lizaveta looked at him, and Tomsky’s words found an echo in her
      soul: “This man has at least three crimes upon his conscience!”
      Hermann sat down by the window near her, and related all that had
      happened.
    

      Lizaveta listened to him in terror. So all those passionate letters, those
      ardent desires, this bold obstinate pursuit—all this was not love!
      Money—that was what his soul yearned for! She could not satisfy his
      desire and make him happy! The poor girl had been nothing but the blind
      tool of a robber, of the murderer of her aged benefactress!... She wept
      bitter tears of agonised repentance. Hermann gazed at her in silence: his
      heart, too, was a prey to violent emotion, but neither the tears of the
      poor girl, nor the wonderful charm of her beauty, enhanced by her grief,
      could produce any impression upon his hardened soul. He felt no pricking
      of conscience at the thought of the dead old woman. One thing only grieved
      him: the irreparable loss of the secret from which he had expected to
      obtain great wealth.
    

      “You are a monster!” said Lizaveta at last.
    

      “I did not wish for her death,” replied Hermann: “my
      pistol was not loaded.”
    

      Both remained silent.
    

      The day began to dawn. Lizaveta extinguished her candle: a pale light
      illumined her room. She wiped her tear-stained eyes and raised them
      towards Hermann: he was sitting near the window, with his arms crossed and
      with a fierce frown upon his forehead. In this attitude he bore a striking
      resemblance to the portrait of Napoleon. This resemblance struck Lizaveta
      even.
    

      “How shall I get you out of the house?” said she at last.
      “I thought of conducting you down the secret staircase, but in that
      case it would be necessary to go through the Countess’s bedroom, and
      I am afraid.”
    

      “Tell me how to find this secret staircase—I will go alone.”
    

      Lizaveta arose, took from her drawer a key, handed it to Hermann and gave
      him the necessary instructions. Hermann pressed her cold, limp hand,
      kissed her bowed head, and left the room.
    

      He descended the winding staircase, and once more entered the Countess’s
      bedroom. The dead old lady sat as if petrified; her face expressed
      profound tranquillity. Hermann stopped before her, and gazed long and
      earnestly at her, as if he wished to convince himself of the terrible
      reality; at last he entered the cabinet, felt behind the tapestry for the
      door, and then began to descend the dark staircase, filled with strange
      emotions. “Down this very staircase,” thought he, “perhaps
      coming from the very same room, and at this very same hour sixty years
      ago, there may have glided, in an embroidered coat, with his hair dressed
      Ã  l’oiseau royal and pressing to his heart his three-cornered
      hat, some young gallant, who has long been mouldering in the grave, but
      the heart of his aged mistress has only to-day ceased to beat...”
    

      At the bottom of the staircase Hermann found a door, which he opened with
      a key, and then traversed a corridor which conducted him into the street.
    

      V
    

Three days after
      the fatal night, at nine o’clock in the morning, Hermann repaired to
      the Convent of ——, where the last honours were to be paid to
      the mortal remains of the old Countess. Although feeling no remorse, he
      could not altogether stifle the voice of conscience, which said to him:
      “You are the murderer of the old woman!” In spite of his
      entertaining very little religious belief, he was exceedingly
      superstitious; and believing that the dead Countess might exercise an evil
      influence on his life, he resolved to be present at her obsequies in order
      to implore her pardon.
    

      The church was full. It was with difficulty that Hermann made his way
      through the crowd of people. The coffin was placed upon a rich catafalque
      beneath a velvet baldachin. The deceased Countess lay within it, with her
      hands crossed upon her breast, with a lace cap upon her head and dressed
      in a white satin robe. Around the catafalque stood the members of her
      household: the servants in black caftans, with armorial ribbons
      upon their shoulders, and candles in their hands; the relatives—children,
      grandchildren, and great-grandchildren—in deep mourning.
    

      Nobody wept; tears would have been une affectation. The Countess
      was so old, that her death could have surprised nobody, and her relatives
      had long looked upon her as being out of the world. A famous preacher
      pronounced the funeral sermon. In simple and touching words he described
      the peaceful passing away of the righteous, who had passed long years in
      calm preparation for a Christian end. “The angel of death found her,”
      said the orator, “engaged in pious meditation and waiting for the
      midnight bridegroom.”
    

      The service concluded amidst profound silence. The relatives went forward
      first to take farewell of the corpse. Then followed the numerous guests,
      who had come to render the last homage to her who for so many years had
      been a participator in their frivolous amusements. After these followed
      the members of the Countess’s household. The last of these was an
      old woman of the same age as the deceased. Two young women led her forward
      by the hand. She had not strength enough to bow down to the ground—she
      merely shed a few tears and kissed the cold hand of her mistress.
    

      Hermann now resolved to approach the coffin. He knelt down upon the cold
      stones and remained in that position for some minutes; at last he arose,
      as pale as the deceased Countess herself; he ascended the steps of the
      catafalque and bent over the corpse... At that moment it seemed to him
      that the dead woman darted a mocking look at him and winked with one eye.
      Hermann started back, took a false step and fell to the ground. Several
      persons hurried forward and raised him up. At the same moment Lizaveta
      Ivanovna was borne fainting into the porch of the church. This episode
      disturbed for some minutes the solemnity of the gloomy ceremony. Among the
      congregation arose a deep murmur, and a tall thin chamberlain, a near
      relative of the deceased, whispered in the ear of an Englishman who was
      standing near him, that the young officer was a natural son of the
      Countess, to which the Englishman coldly replied: “Oh!”
    

      During the whole of that day, Hermann was strangely excited. Repairing to
      an out-of-the-way restaurant to dine, he drank a great deal of wine,
      contrary to his usual custom, in the hope of deadening his inward
      agitation. But the wine only served to excite his imagination still more.
      On returning home, he threw himself upon his bed without undressing, and
      fell into a deep sleep.
    

      When he woke up it was already night, and the moon was shining into the
      room. He looked at his watch: it was a quarter to three. Sleep had left
      him; he sat down upon his bed and thought of the funeral of the old
      Countess.
    

      At that moment somebody in the street looked in at his window, and
      immediately passed on again. Hermann paid no attention to this incident. A
      few moments afterwards he heard the door of his ante-room open. Hermann
      thought that it was his orderly, drunk as usual, returning from some
      nocturnal expedition, but presently he heard footsteps that were unknown
      to him: somebody was walking softly over the floor in slippers. The door
      opened, and a woman dressed in white, entered the room. Hermann mistook
      her for his old nurse, and wondered what could bring her there at that
      hour of the night. But the white woman glided rapidly across the room and
      stood before him—and Hermann recognised the Countess!
    

      “I have come to you against my wish,” she said in a firm
      voice: “but I have been ordered to grant your request. Three, seven,
      ace, will win for you if played in succession, but only on these
      conditions: that you do not play more than one card in twenty-four hours,
      and that you never play again during the rest of your life. I forgive you
      my death, on condition that you marry my companion, Lizaveta Ivanovna.”
    

      With these words she turned round very quietly, walked with a shuffling
      gait towards the door and disappeared. Hermann heard the street-door open
      and shut, and again he saw some one look in at him through the window.
    

      For a long time Hermann could not recover himself. He then rose up and
      entered the next room. His orderly was lying asleep upon the floor, and he
      had much difficulty in waking him. The orderly was drunk as usual, and no
      information could be obtained from him. The street-door was locked.
      Hermann returned to his room, lit his candle, and wrote down all the
      details of his vision.
    

      VI
    

Two fixed ideas can
      no more exist together in the moral world than two bodies can occupy one
      and the same place in the physical world. “Three, seven, ace,”
      soon drove out of Hermann’s mind the thought of the dead Countess.
      “Three, seven, ace,” were perpetually running through his head
      and continually being repeated by his lips. If he saw a young girl, he
      would say: “How slender she is! quite like the three of hearts.”
      If anybody asked: “What is the time?” he would reply: “Five
      minutes to seven.” Every stout man that he saw reminded him of the
      ace. “Three, seven, ace” haunted him in his sleep, and assumed
      all possible shapes. The threes bloomed before him in the forms of
      magnificent flowers, the sevens were represented by Gothic portals, and
      the aces became transformed into gigantic spiders. One thought alone
      occupied his whole mind—to make a profitable use of the secret which
      he had purchased so dearly. He thought of applying for a furlough so as to
      travel abroad. He wanted to go to Paris and tempt fortune in some of the
      public gambling-houses that abounded there. Chance spared him all this
      trouble.
    

      There was in Moscow a society of rich gamesters, presided over by the
      celebrated Chekalinsky, who had passed all his life at the card-table and
      had amassed millions, accepting bills of exchange for his winnings and
      paying his losses in ready money. His long experience secured for him the
      confidence of his companions, and his open house, his famous cook, and his
      agreeable and fascinating manners gained for him the respect of the
      public. He came to St. Petersburg. The young men of the capital flocked to
      his rooms, forgetting balls for cards, and preferring the emotions of faro
      to the seductions of flirting. Narumov conducted Hermann to Chekalinsky’s
      residence.
    

      They passed through a suite of magnificent rooms, filled with attentive
      domestics. The place was crowded. Generals and Privy Counsellors were
      playing at whist; young men were lolling carelessly upon the
      velvet-covered sofas, eating ices and smoking pipes. In the drawing-room,
      at the head of a long table, around which were assembled about a score of
      players, sat the master of the house keeping the bank. He was a man of
      about sixty years of age, of a very dignified appearance; his head was
      covered with silvery-white hair; his full, florid countenance expressed
      good-nature, and his eyes twinkled with a perpetual smile. Narumov
      introduced Hermann to him. Chekalinsky shook him by the hand in a friendly
      manner, requested him not to stand on ceremony, and then went on dealing.
    

      The game occupied some time. On the table lay more than thirty cards.
      Chekalinsky paused after each throw, in order to give the players time to
      arrange their cards and note down their losses, listened politely to their
      requests, and more politely still, put straight the corners of cards that
      some player’s hand had chanced to bend. At last the game was
      finished. Chekalinsky shuffled the cards and prepared to deal again.
    

      “Will you allow me to take a card?” said Hermann, stretching
      out his hand from behind a stout gentleman who was punting.
    

      Chekalinsky smiled and bowed silently, as a sign of acquiescence. Narumov
      laughingly congratulated Hermann on his abjuration of that abstention from
      cards which he had practised for so long a period, and wished him a lucky
      beginning.
    

      “Stake!” said Hermann, writing some figures with chalk on the
      back of his card.
    

      “How much?” asked the banker, contracting the muscles of his
      eyes; “excuse me, I cannot see quite clearly.”
    

      “Forty-seven thousand rubles,” replied Hermann.
    

      At these words every head in the room turned suddenly round, and all eyes
      were fixed upon Hermann.
    

      “He has taken leave of his senses!” thought Narumov.
    

      “Allow me to inform you,” said Chekalinsky, with his eternal
      smile, “that you are playing very high; nobody here has ever staked
      more than two hundred and seventy-five rubles at once.”
    

      “Very well,” replied Hermann; “but do you accept my card
      or not?”
    

      Chekalinsky bowed in token of consent.
    

      “I only wish to observe,” said he, “that although I have
      the greatest confidence in my friends, I can only play against ready
      money. For my own part, I am quite convinced that your word is sufficient,
      but for the sake of the order of the game, and to facilitate the reckoning
      up, I must ask you to put the money on your card.”
    

      Hermann drew from his pocket a bank-note and handed it to Chekalinsky,
      who, after examining it in a cursory manner, placed it on Hermann’s
      card.
    

      He began to deal. On the right a nine turned up, and on the left a three.
    

      “I have won!” said Hermann, showing his card.
    

      A murmur of astonishment arose among the players. Chekalinsky frowned, but
      the smile quickly returned to his face.
    

      “Do you wish me to settle with you?” he said to Hermann.
    

      “If you please,” replied the latter.
    

      Chekalinsky drew from his pocket a number of banknotes and paid at once.
      Hermann took up his money and left the table. Narumov could not recover
      from his astonishment. Hermann drank a glass of lemonade and returned
      home.
    

      The next evening he again repaired to Chekalinsky’s. The host was
      dealing. Hermann walked up to the table; the punters immediately made room
      for him. Chekalinsky greeted him with a gracious bow.
    

      Hermann waited for the next deal, took a card and placed upon it his
      forty-seven thousand roubles, together with his winnings of the previous
      evening.
    

      Chekalinsky began to deal. A knave turned up on the right, a seven on the
      left.
    

      Hermann showed his seven.
    

      There was a general exclamation. Chekalinsky was evidently ill at ease,
      but he counted out the ninety-four thousand rubles and handed them over to
      Hermann, who pocketed them in the coolest manner possible and immediately
      left the house.
    

      The next evening Hermann appeared again at the table. Every one was
      expecting him. The generals and Privy Counsellors left their whist in
      order to watch such extraordinary play. The young officers quitted their
      sofas, and even the servants crowded into the room. All pressed round
      Hermann. The other players left off punting, impatient to see how it would
      end. Hermann stood at the table and prepared to play alone against the
      pale, but still smiling Chekalinsky. Each opened a pack of cards.
      Chekalinsky shuffled. Hermann took a card and covered it with a pile of
      bank-notes. It was like a duel. Deep silence reigned around.
    

      Chekalinsky began to deal; his hands trembled. On the right a queen turned
      up, and on the left an ace.
    

      “Ace has won!” cried Hermann, showing his card.
    

      “Your queen has lost,” said Chekalinsky, politely.
    

      Hermann started; instead of an ace, there lay before him the queen of
      spades! He could not believe his eyes, nor could he understand how he had
      made such a mistake.
    

      At that moment it seemed to him that the queen of spades smiled ironically
      and winked her eye at him. He was struck by her remarkable resemblance...
    

      “The old Countess!” he exclaimed, seized with terror.
    

      Chekalinsky gathered up his winnings. For some time, Hermann remained
      perfectly motionless. When at last he left the table, there was a general
      commotion in the room.
    

      “Splendidly punted!” said the players. Chekalinsky shuffled
      the cards afresh, and the game went on as usual.
    








      Hermann went out of his mind, and is now confined in room Number 17 of the
      Obukhov Hospital. He never answers any questions, but he constantly
      mutters with unusual rapidity: “Three, seven, ace!” “Three,
      seven, queen!”
    

      Lizaveta Ivanovna has married a very amiable young man, a son of the
      former steward of the old Countess. He is in the service of the State
      somewhere, and is in receipt of a good income. Lizaveta is also supporting
      a poor relative.
    

      Tomsky has been promoted to the rank of captain, and has become the
      husband of the Princess Pauline.
    











      THE CLOAK
    

      BY NIKOLAY V. GOGOL
    

In the department
      of——, but it is better not to mention the department. The
      touchiest things in the world are departments, regiments, courts of
      justice, in a word, all branches of public service. Each individual
      nowadays thinks all society insulted in his person. Quite recently, a
      complaint was received from a district chief of police in which he plainly
      demonstrated that all the imperial institutions were going to the dogs,
      and that the Czar’s sacred name was being taken in vain; and in
      proof he appended to the complaint a romance, in which the district chief
      of police is made to appear about once in every ten pages, and sometimes
      in a downright drunken condition. Therefore, in order to avoid all
      unpleasantness, it will be better to designate the department in question,
      as a certain department.
    

      So, in a certain department there was a certain official—not a very
      notable one, it must be allowed—short of stature, somewhat
      pock-marked, red-haired, and mole-eyed, with a bald forehead, wrinkled
      cheeks, and a complexion of the kind known as sanguine. The St. Petersburg
      climate was responsible for this. As for his official rank—with us
      Russians the rank comes first—he was what is called a perpetual
      titular councillor, over which, as is well known, some writers make merry
      and crack their jokes, obeying the praiseworthy custom of attacking those
      who cannot bite back.
    

      His family name was Bashmachkin. This name is evidently derived from
      bashmak (shoe); but, when, at what time, and in what manner, is not known.
      His father and grandfather, and all the Bashmachkins, always wore boots,
      which were resoled two or three times a year. His name was Akaky
      Akakiyevich. It may strike the reader as rather singular and far-fetched;
      but he may rest assured that it was by no means far-fetched, and that the
      circumstances were such that it would have been impossible to give him any
      other.
    

      This was how it came about.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich was born, if my memory fails me not, in the evening on
      the 23rd of March. His mother, the wife of a Government official, and a
      very fine woman, made all due arrangements for having the child baptised.
      She was lying on the bed opposite the door; on her right stood the
      godfather, Ivan Ivanovich Eroshkin, a most estimable man, who served as
      the head clerk of the senate; and the godmother, Arina Semyonovna
      Bielobrinshkova, the wife of an officer of the quarter, and a woman of
      rare virtues. They offered the mother her choice of three names, Mokiya,
      Sossiya, or that the child should be called after the martyr Khozdazat.
      “No,” said the good woman, “all those names are poor.”
      In order to please her, they opened the calendar at another place; three
      more names appeared, Triphily, Dula, and Varakhasy. “This is awful,”
      said the old woman. “What names! I truly never heard the like. I
      might have put up with Varadat or Varukh, but not Triphily and Varakhasy!”
      They turned to another page and found Pavsikakhy and Vakhtisy. “Now
      I see,” said the old woman, “that it is plainly fate. And
      since such is the case, it will be better to name him after his father.
      His father’s name was Akaky, so let his son’s name be Akaky
      too.” In this manner he became Akaky Akakiyevich. They christened
      the child, whereat he wept, and made a grimace, as though he foresaw that
      he was to be a titular councillor.
    

      In this manner did it all come about. We have mentioned it in order that
      the reader might see for himself that it was a case of necessity, and that
      it was utterly impossible to give him any other name.
    

      When and how he entered the department, and who appointed him, no one
      could remember. However much the directors and chiefs of all kinds were
      changed, he was always to be seen in the same place, the same attitude,
      the same occupation—always the letter-copying clerk—so that it
      was afterwards affirmed that he had been born in uniform with a bald head.
      No respect was shown him in the department. The porter not only did not
      rise from his seat when he passed, but never even glanced at him, any more
      than if a fly had flown through the reception-room. His superiors treated
      him in coolly despotic fashion. Some insignificant assistant to the head
      clerk would thrust a paper under his nose without so much as saying,
      “Copy,” or, “Here’s an interesting little case,”
      or anything else agreeable, as is customary amongst well-bred officials.
      And he took it, looking only at the paper, and not observing who handed it
      to him, or whether he had the right to do so; simply took it, and set
      about copying it.
    

      The young officials laughed at and made fun of him, so far as their
      official wit permitted; told in his presence various stories concocted
      about him, and about his landlady, an old woman of seventy; declared that
      she beat him; asked when the wedding was to be; and strewed bits of paper
      over his head, calling them snow. But Akaky Akakiyevich answered not a
      word, any more than if there had been no one there besides himself. It
      even had no effect upon his work. Amid all these annoyances he never made
      a single mistake in a letter. But if the joking became wholly unbearable,
      as when they jogged his head, and prevented his attending to his work, he
      would exclaim:
    

      “Leave me alone! Why do you insult me?”
    

      And there was something strange in the words and the voice in which they
      were uttered. There was in it something which moved to pity; so much so
      that one young man, a newcomer, who, taking pattern by the others, had
      permitted himself to make sport of Akaky, suddenly stopped short, as
      though all about him had undergone a transformation, and presented itself
      in a different aspect. Some unseen force repelled him from the comrades
      whose acquaintance he had made, on the supposition that they were decent,
      well-bred men. Long afterwards, in his gayest moments, there recurred to
      his mind the little official with the bald forehead, with his
      heart-rending words, “Leave me alone! Why do you insult me?”
      In these moving words, other words resounded—“I am thy
      brother.” And the young man covered his face with his hand; and many
      a time afterwards, in the course of his life, shuddered at seeing how much
      inhumanity there is in man, how much savage coarseness is concealed
      beneath refined, cultured, worldly refinement, and even, O God! in that
      man whom the world acknowledges as honourable and upright.
    

      It would be difficult to find another man who lived so entirely for his
      duties. It is not enough to say that Akaky laboured with zeal; no, he
      laboured with love. In his copying, he found a varied and agreeable
      employment. Enjoyment was written on his face; some letters were even
      favourites with him; and when he encountered these, he smiled, winked, and
      worked with his lips, till it seemed as though each letter might be read
      in his face, as his pen traced it. If his pay had been in proportion to
      his zeal, he would, perhaps, to his great surprise, have been made even a
      councillor of state. But he worked, as his companions, the wits, put it,
      like a horse in a mill.
    

      However, it would be untrue to say that no attention was paid to him. One
      director being a kindly man, and desirous of rewarding him for his long
      service, ordered him to be given something more important than mere
      copying. So he was ordered to make a report of an already concluded
      affair, to another department; the duty consisting simply in changing the
      heading and altering a few words from the first to the third person. This
      caused him so much toil, that he broke into a perspiration, rubbed his
      forehead, and finally said, “No, give me rather something to copy.”
      After that they let him copy on forever.
    

      Outside this copying, it appeared that nothing existed for him. He gave no
      thought to his clothes. His uniform was not green, but a sort of
      rusty-meal colour. The collar was low, so that his neck, in spite of the
      fact that it was not long, seemed inordinately so as it emerged from it,
      like the necks of the plaster cats which pedlars carry about on their
      heads. And something was always sticking to his uniform, either a bit of
      hay or some trifle. Moreover, he had a peculiar knack, as he walked along
      the street, of arriving beneath a window just as all sorts of rubbish was
      being flung out of it; hence he always bore about on his hat scraps of
      melon rinds, and other such articles. Never once in his life did he give
      heed to what was going on every day to the street; while it is well known
      that his young brother officials trained the range of their glances till
      they could see when any one’s trouser-straps came undone upon the
      opposite sidewalk, which always brought a malicious smile to their faces.
      But Akaky Akakiyevich saw in all things the clean, even strokes of his
      written lines; and only when a horse thrust his nose, from some unknown
      quarter, over his shoulder, and sent a whole gust of wind down his neck
      from his nostrils, did he observe that he was not in the middle of a line,
      but in the middle of the street.
    

      On reaching home, he sat down at once at the table, sipped his
      cabbage-soup up quickly, and swallowed a bit of beef with onions, never
      noticing their taste, and gulping down everything with flies and anything
      else which the Lord happened to send at the moment. When he saw that his
      stomach was beginning to swell, he rose from the table, and copied papers
      which he had brought home. If there happened to be none, he took copies
      for himself, for his own gratification, especially if the document was
      noteworthy, not on account of its style, but of its being addressed to
      some distinguished person.
    

      Even at the hour when the grey St. Petersburg sky had quite disappeared,
      and all the official world had eaten or dined, each as he could, in
      accordance with the salary he received and his own fancy; when, all were
      resting from the department jar of pens, running to and fro, for their own
      and other people’s indispensable occupations’, and from all
      the work that an uneasy man makes willingly for himself, rather than what
      is necessary; when, officials hasten to dedicate to pleasure the time
      which is left to them, one bolder than the rest, going to the theatre;
      another; into the street looking under the bonnets; another, wasting his
      evening in compliments to some pretty girl, the star of a small official
      circle; another—and this is the common case of all—visiting
      his comrades on the third or fourth floor, in two small rooms with an
      ante-room or kitchen, and some pretensions to fashion, such as a lamp or
      some other trifle which has cost many a sacrifice of dinner or pleasure
      trip; in a word, at the hour when all officials disperse among the
      contracted quarters of their friends, to play whist, as they sip their tea
      from glasses with a kopek’s worth of sugar, smoke long pipes, relate
      at time some bits of gossip which a Russian man can never, under any
      circumstances, refrain from, and when there is nothing else to talk of,
      repeat eternal anecdotes about the commandant to whom they had sent word
      that the tails of the horses on the Falconet Monument had been cut off;
      when all strive to divert themselves, Akaky Akakiyevich indulged in no
      kind of diversion. No one could even say that he had seen him at any kind
      of evening party. Having written to his heart’s content, he lay down
      to sleep, smiling at the thought of the coming day—of what God might
      send him to copy on the morrow.
    

      Thus flowed on the peaceful life of the man, who, with a salary of four
      hundred rubles, understood how to be content with his lot; and thus it
      would have continued to flow on, perhaps, to extreme old age, were it not
      that there are various ills strewn along the path of life for titular
      councillors as well as for private, actual, court, and every other species
      of councillor, even to those who never give any advice or take any
      themselves.
    

      There exists in St. Petersburg a powerful foe of all who receive a salary
      of four hundred rubles a year, or there-abouts. This foe is no other than
      the Northern cold, although it is said to be very healthy. At nine o’clock
      in the morning, at the very hour when the streets are filled with men
      bound for the various official departments, it begins to bestow such
      powerful and piercing nips on all noses impartially, that the poor
      officials really do not know what to do with them. At an hour, when the
      foreheads of even those who occupy exalted positions ache with the cold,
      and tears start to their eyes, the poor titular councillors are sometimes
      quite unprotected. Their only salvation lies in traversing as quickly as
      possible, in their thin little cloaks, five or six streets, and then
      warming their feet in the porter’s room, and so thawing all their
      talents and qualifications for official service, which had become frozen
      on the way.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich had felt for some time that his back and shoulders were
      paining with peculiar poignancy, in spite of the fact that he tried to
      traverse the distance with all possible speed. He began finally to wonder
      whether the fault did not lie in his cloak. He examined it thoroughly at
      home, and discovered that in two places, namely, on the back and
      shoulders, it had become thin as gauze. The cloth was worn to such a
      degree that he could see through it, and the lining had fallen into
      pieces. You must know that Akaky Akakiyevich’s cloak served as an
      object of ridicule to the officials. They even refused it the noble name
      of cloak, and called it a cape. In fact, it was of singular make, its
      collar diminishing year by year to serve to patch its other parts. The
      patching did not exhibit great skill on the part of the tailor, and was,
      in fact, baggy and ugly. Seeing how the matter stood, Akaky Akakiyevich
      decided that it would be necessary to take the cloak to Petrovich, the
      tailor, who lived somewhere on the fourth floor up a dark staircase, and
      who, in spite of his having but one eye and pock-marks all over his face,
      busied himself with considerable success in repairing the trousers and
      coats of officials and others; that is to say, when he was sober and not
      nursing some other scheme in his head.
    

      It is not necessary to say much about this tailor, but as it is the custom
      to have the character of each personage in a novel clearly defined there
      is no help for it, so here is Petrovich the tailor. At first he was called
      only Grigory, and was some gentleman’s serf. He commenced calling
      himself Petrovich from the time when he received his free papers, and
      further began to drink heavily on all holidays, at first on the great
      ones, and then on all church festivals without discrimination, wherever a
      cross stood in the calendar. On this point he was faithful to ancestral
      custom; and when quarrelling with his wife, he called her a low female and
      a German. As we have mentioned his wife, it will be necessary to say a
      word or two about her. Unfortunately, little is known of her beyond the
      fact that Petrovich had a wife, who wore a cap and a dress, but could not
      lay claim to beauty, at least, no one but the soldiers of the guard even
      looked under her cap when they met her.
    

      Ascending the staircase which led to Petrovich’s room—which
      staircase was all soaked with dish-water and reeked with the smell of
      spirits which affects the eyes, and is an inevitable adjunct to all dark
      stairways in St. Petersburg houses—ascending the stairs, Akaky
      Akakiyevich pondered how much Petrovich would ask, and mentally resolved
      not to give more than two rubles. The door was open, for the mistress, in
      cooking some fish, had raised such a smoke in the kitchen that not even
      the beetles were visible. Akaky Akakiyevich passed through the kitchen
      unperceived, even by the housewife, and at length reached a room where he
      beheld Petrovich seated on a large unpainted table, with his legs tucked
      under him like a Turkish pasha. His feet were bare, after the fashion of
      tailors as they sit at work; and the first thing which caught the eye was
      his thumb, with a deformed nail thick and strong as a turtle’s
      shell. About Petrovich’s neck hung a skein of silk and thread, and
      upon his knees lay some old garment. He had been trying unsuccessfully for
      three minutes to thread his needle, and was enraged at the darkness and
      even at the thread, growling in a low voice, “It won’t go
      through, the barbarian! you pricked me, you rascal!”
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich was vexed at arriving at the precise moment when
      Petrovich was angry. He liked to order something of Petrovich when he was
      a little downhearted, or, as his wife expressed it, “when he had
      settled himself with brandy, the one-eyed devil!” Under such
      circumstances Petrovich generally came down in his price very readily, and
      even bowed and returned thanks. Afterwards, to be sure, his wife would
      come, complaining that her husband had been drunk, and so had fixed the
      price too low; but, if only a ten-kopek piece were added then the matter
      would be settled. But now it appeared that Petrovich was in a sober
      condition, and therefore rough, taciturn, and inclined to demand, Satan
      only knows what price. Akaky Akakiyevich felt this, and would gladly have
      beat a retreat, but he was in for it. Petrovich screwed up his one eye
      very intently at him, and Akaky Akakiyevich involuntarily said, “How
      do you do, Petrovich?”
    

      “I wish you a good morning, sir,” said Petrovich squinting at
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s hands, to see what sort of booty he had brought.
    

      “Ah! I—to you, Petrovich, this—” It must be known
      that Akaky Akakiyevich expressed himself chiefly by prepositions, adverbs,
      and scraps of phrases which had no meaning whatever. If the matter was a
      very difficult one, he had a habit of never completing his sentences, so
      that frequently, having begun a phrase with the words, “This, in
      fact, is quite—” he forgot to go on, thinking he had already
      finished it.
    

      “What is it?” asked Petrovich, and with his one eye scanned
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s whole uniform from the collar down to the cuffs,
      the back, the tails and the button-holes, all of which were well known to
      him, since they were his own handiwork. Such is the habit of tailors; it
      is the first thing they do on meeting one.
    

      “But I, here, this—Petrovich—a cloak, cloth—here
      you see, everywhere, in different places, it is quite strong—it is a
      little dusty and looks old, but it is new, only here in one place it is a
      little—on the back, and here on one of the shoulders, it is a little
      worn, yes, here on this shoulder it is a little—do you see? That is
      all. And a little work—”
    

      Petrovich took the cloak, spread it out, to begin with, on the table,
      looked at it hard, shook his head, reached out his hand to the window-sill
      for his snuff-box, adorned with the portrait of some general, though what
      general is unknown, for the place where the face should have been had been
      rubbed through by the finger and a square bit of paper had been pasted
      over it. Having taken a pinch of snuff, Petrovich held up the cloak, and
      inspected it against the light, and again shook his head. Then he turned
      it, lining upwards, and shook his head once more. After which he again
      lifted the general-adorned lid with its bit of pasted paper, and having
      stuffed his nose with snuff, dosed and put away the snuff-box, and said
      finally, “No, it is impossible to mend it. It is a wretched garment!”
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich’s heart sank at these words.
    

      “Why is it impossible, Petrovich?” he said, almost in the
      pleading voice of a child. “All that ails it is, that it is worn on
      the shoulders. You must have some pieces—”
    

      “Yes, patches could be found, patches are easily found,” said
      Petrovich, “but there’s nothing to sew them to. The thing is
      completely rotten. If you put a needle to it—see, it will give way.”
    

      “Let it give way, and you can put on another patch at once.”
    

      “But there is nothing to put the patches on to. There’s no use
      in strengthening it. It is too far gone. It’s lucky that it’s
      cloth, for, if the wind were to blow, it would fly away.”
    

      “Well, strengthen it again. How this, in fact—”
    

      “No,” said Petrovich decisively, “there is nothing to be
      done with it. It’s a thoroughly bad job. You’d better, when
      the cold winter weather comes on, make yourself some gaiters out of it,
      because stockings are not warm. The Germans invented them in order to make
      more money.” Petrovich loved on all occasions to have a fling at the
      Germans. “But it is plain you must have a new cloak.”
    

      At the word “new” all grew dark before Akaky Akakiyevich’s
      eyes, and everything in the room began to whirl round. The only thing he
      saw clearly was the general with the paper face on the lid of Petrovich’s
      snuff-box. “A new one?” said he, as if still in a dream.
      “Why, I have no money for that.”
    

      “Yes, a new one,” said Petrovich, with barbarous composure.
    

      “Well, if it came to a new one, how—it—”
    

      “You mean how much would it cost?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Well, you would have to lay out a hundred and fifty or more,”
      said Petrovich, and pursed up his lips significantly. He liked to produce
      powerful effects, liked to stun utterly and suddenly, and then to glance
      sideways to see what face the stunned person would put on the matter.
    

      “A hundred and fifty rubles for a cloak!” shrieked poor Akaky
      Akakiyevich, perhaps for the first time in his life, for his voice had
      always been distinguished for softness.
    

      “Yes, sir,” said Petrovich, “for any kind of cloak. If
      you have a marten fur on the collar, or a silk-lined hood, it will mount
      up to two hundred.”
    

      “Petrovich, please,” said Akaky Akakiyevich in a beseeching
      tone, not hearing, and not trying to hear, Petrovich’s words, and
      disregarding all his “effects,” “some repairs, in order
      that it may wear yet a little longer.”
    

      “No, it would only be a waste of time and money,” said
      Petrovich. And Akaky Akakiyevich went away after these words, utterly
      discouraged. But Petrovich stood for some time after his departure, with
      significantly compressed lips, and without betaking himself to his work,
      satisfied that he would not be dropped, and an artistic tailor employed.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich went out into the street as if in a dream. “Such
      an affair!” he said to himself. “I did not think it had come
      to—” and then after a pause, he added, “Well, so it is!
      see what it has come to at last! and I never imagined that it was so!”
      Then followed a long silence, after which he exclaimed, “Well, so it
      is! see what already—nothing unexpected that—it would be
      nothing—what a strange circumstance!” So saying, instead of
      going home, he went in exactly the opposite direction without suspecting
      it. On the way, a chimney-sweep bumped up against him, and blackened his
      shoulder, and a whole hatful of rubbish landed on him from the top of a
      house which was building. He did not notice it, and only when he ran
      against a watchman, who, having planted his halberd beside him, was
      shaking some snuff from his box into his horny hand, did he recover
      himself a little, and that because the watchman said, “Why are you
      poking yourself into a man’s very face? Haven’t you the
      pavement?” This caused him to look about him, and turn towards home.
    

      There only, he finally began to collect his thoughts, and to survey his
      position in its clear and actual light, and to argue with himself,
      sensibly and frankly, as with a reasonable friend, with whom one can
      discuss private and personal matters. “No,” said Akaky
      Akakiyevich, “it is impossible to reason with Petrovich now. He is
      that—evidently, his wife has been beating him. I’d better go
      to him on Sunday morning. After Saturday night he will be a little
      cross-eyed and sleepy, for he will want to get drunk, and his wife won’t
      give him any money, and at such a time, a ten-kopek piece in his hand will—he
      will become more fit to reason with, and then the cloak and that—”
      Thus argued Akaky Akakiyevich with himself regained his courage, and
      waited until the first Sunday, when, seeing from afar that Petrovich’s
      wife had left the house, he went straight to him.
    

      Petrovich’s eye was indeed very much askew after Saturday. His head
      drooped, and he was very sleepy; but for all that, as soon as he knew what
      it was a question of, it seemed as though Satan jogged his memory. “Impossible,”
      said he. “Please to order a new one.” Thereupon Akaky
      Akakiyevich handed over the ten-kopek piece. “Thank you, sir. I will
      drink your good health,” said Petrovich. “But as for the
      cloak, don’t trouble yourself about it; it is good for nothing. I
      will make you a capital new one, so let us settle about it now.”
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich was still for mending it, but Petrovich would not hear
      of it, and said, “I shall certainly have to make you a new one, and
      you may depend upon it that I shall do my best. It may even be, as the
      fashion goes, that the collar can be fastened by silver hooks under a
      flap.”
    

      Then Akaky Akakiyevich saw that it was impossible to get along without a
      new cloak, and his spirit sank utterly. How, in fact, was it to be done?
      Where was the money to come from? He must have some new trousers, and pay
      a debt of long standing to the shoemaker for putting new tops to his old
      boots, and he must order three shirts from the seamstress, and a couple of
      pieces of linen. In short, all his money must be spent. And even if the
      director should be so kind as to order him to receive forty-five or even
      fifty rubles instead of forty, it would be a mere nothing, a mere drop in
      the ocean towards the funds necessary for a cloak, although he knew that
      Petrovich was often wrong-headed enough to blurt out some outrageous
      price, so that even his own wife could not refrain from exclaiming,
      “Have you lost your senses, you fool?” At one time he would
      not work at any price, and now it was quite likely that he had named a
      higher sum than the cloak would cost.
    

      But although he knew that Petrovich would undertake to make a cloak for
      eighty rubles, still, where was he to get the eighty rubles from? He might
      possibly manage half. Yes, half might be procured, but where was the other
      half to come from? But the reader must first be told where the first half
      came from.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich had a habit of putting, for every ruble he spent, a
      groschen into a small box, fastened with lock and key, and with a slit in
      the top for the reception of money. At the end of every half-year he
      counted over the heap of coppers, and changed it for silver. This he had
      done for a long time, and in the course of years, the sum had mounted up
      to over forty rubles. Thus he had one half on hand. But where was he to
      find the other half? Where was he to get another forty rubles from? Akaky
      Akakiyevich thought and thought, and decided that it would be necessary to
      curtail his ordinary expenses, for the space of one year at least, to
      dispense with tea in the evening, to burn no candles, and, if there was
      anything which he must do, to go into his landlady’s room, and work
      by her light. When he went into the street, he must walk as lightly as he
      could, and as cautiously, upon the stones, almost upon tiptoe, in order
      not to wear his heels down in too short a time. He must give the laundress
      as little to wash as possible; and, in order not to wear out his clothes,
      he must take them off as soon as he got home, and wear only his cotton
      dressing-gown, which had been long and carefully saved.
    

      To tell the truth, it was a little hard for him at first to accustom
      himself to these deprivations. But he got used to them at length, after a
      fashion, and all went smoothly. He even got used to being hungry in the
      evening, but he made up for it by treating himself, so to say, in spirit,
      by bearing ever in mind the idea of his future cloak. From that time
      forth, his existence seemed to become, in some way, fuller, as if he were
      married, or as if some other man lived in him, as if, in fact, he were not
      alone, and some pleasant friend had consented to travel along life’s
      path with him, the friend being no other than the cloak, with thick
      wadding and a strong lining incapable of wearing out. He became more
      lively, and even his character grew firmer, like that of a man who has
      made up his mind, and set himself a goal. From his face and gait, doubt
      and indecision, all hesitating and wavering disappeared of themselves.
      Fire gleamed in his eyes, and occasionally the boldest and most daring
      ideas flitted through his mind. Why not, for instance, have marten fur on
      the collar? The thought of this almost made him absent-minded. Once, in
      copying a letter, he nearly made a mistake, so that he exclaimed almost
      aloud, “Ugh!” and crossed himself. Once, in the course of
      every month, he had a conference with Petrovich on the subject of the
      cloak, where it would be better to buy the cloth, and the colour, and the
      price. He always returned home satisfied, though troubled, reflecting that
      the time would come at last when it could all be bought, and then the
      cloak made.
    

      The affair progressed more briskly than he had expected. For beyond all
      his hopes, the director awarded neither forty nor forty-five rubles for
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s share, but sixty. Whether he suspected that
      Akaky Akakiyevich needed a cloak, or whether it was merely chance, at all
      events, twenty extra rubles were by this means provided. This circumstance
      hastened matters. Two or three months more of hunger and Akaky Akakiyevich
      had accumulated about eighty rubles. His heart, generally so quiet, began
      to throb. On the first possible day, he went shopping in company with
      Petrovich. They bought some very good cloth, and at a reasonable rate too,
      for they had been considering the matter for six months, and rarely let a
      month pass without their visiting the shops to enquire prices. Petrovich
      himself said that no better cloth could be had. For lining, they selected
      a cotton stuff, but so firm and thick, that Petrovich declared it to be
      better than silk, and even prettier and more glossy. They did not buy the
      marten fur, because it was, in fact, dear, but in its stead, they picked
      out the very best of cat-skin which could be found in the shop, and which
      might, indeed, be taken for marten at a distance.
    

      Petrovich worked at the cloak two whole weeks, for there was a great deal
      of quilting; otherwise it would have been finished sooner. He charged
      twelve rubles for the job, it could not possibly have been done for less.
      It was all sewed with silk, in small, double seams, and Petrovich went
      over each seam afterwards with his own teeth, stamping in various
      patterns.
    

      It was—it is difficult to say precisely on what day, but probably
      the most glorious one in Akaky Akakiyevich’s life, when Petrovich at
      length brought home the cloak. He brought it in the morning, before the
      hour when it was necessary to start for the department. Never did a cloak
      arrive so exactly in the nick of time, for the severe cold had set in, and
      it seemed to threaten to increase. Petrovich brought the cloak himself as
      befits a good tailor. On his countenance was a significant expression,
      such as Akaky Akakiyevich had never beheld there. He seemed fully sensible
      that he had done no small deed, and crossed a gulf separating tailors who
      put in linings, and execute repairs, from those who make new things. He
      took the cloak out of the pocket-handkerchief in which he had brought it.
      The handkerchief was fresh from the laundress, and he put it in his pocket
      for use. Taking out the cloak, he gazed proudly at it, held it up with
      both hands, and flung it skilfully over the shoulders of Akaky
      Akakiyevich. Then he pulled it and fitted it down behind with his hand,
      and he draped it around Akaky Akakiyevich without buttoning it. Akaky
      Akakiyevich, like an experienced man, wished to try the sleeves. Petrovich
      helped him on with them, and it turned out that the sleeves were
      satisfactory also. In short, the cloak appeared to be perfect, and most
      seasonable. Petrovich did not neglect to observe that it was only because
      he lived in a narrow street, and had no signboard, and had known Akaky
      Akakiyevich so long, that he had made it so cheaply; but that if he had
      been in business on the Nevsky Prospect, he would have charged
      seventy-five rubles for the making alone. Akaky Akakiyevich did not care
      to argue this point with Petrovich. He paid him, thanked him, and set out
      at once in his new cloak for the department. Petrovich followed him, and
      pausing in the street, gazed long at the cloak in the distance, after
      which he went to one side expressly to run through a crooked alley, and
      emerge again into the street beyond to gaze once more upon the cloak from
      another point, namely, directly in front.
    

      Meantime Akaky Akakiyevich went on in holiday mood. He was conscious every
      second of the time that he had a new cloak on his shoulders, and several
      times he laughed with internal satisfaction. In fact, there were two
      advantages, one was its warmth, the other its beauty. He saw nothing of
      the road, but suddenly found himself at the department. He took off his
      cloak in the ante-room, looked it over carefully, and confided it to the
      special care of the attendant. It is impossible to say precisely how it
      was that every one in the department knew at once that Akaky Akakiyevich
      had a new cloak, and that the “cape” no longer existed. All
      rushed at the same moment into the ante-room to inspect it. They
      congratulated him, and said pleasant things to him, so that he began at
      first to smile, and then to grow ashamed. When all surrounded him, and
      said that the new cloak must be “christened,” and that he must
      at least give them all a party, Akaky Akakiyevich lost his head
      completely, and did not know where he stood, what to answer, or how to get
      out of it. He stood blushing all over for several minutes, trying to
      assure them with great simplicity that it was not a new cloak, that it was
      in fact the old “cape.”
    

      At length one of the officials, assistant to the head clerk, in order to
      show that he was not at all proud, and on good terms with his inferiors,
      said:
    

      “So be it, only I will give the party instead of Akaky Akakiyevich;
      I invite you all to tea with me to-night. It just happens to be my
      name-day too.”
    

      The officials naturally at once offered the assistant clerk their
      congratulations, and accepted the invitation with pleasure. Akaky
      Akakiyevich would have declined; but all declared that it was
      discourteous, that it was simply a sin and a shame, and that he could not
      possibly refuse. Besides, the notion became pleasant to him when he
      recollected that he should thereby have a chance of wearing his new cloak
      in the evening also.
    

      That whole day was truly a most triumphant festival for Akaky Akakiyevich.
      He returned home in the most happy frame of mind, took off his cloak, and
      hung it carefully on the wall, admiring afresh the cloth and the lining.
      Then he brought out his old, worn-out cloak, for comparison. He looked at
      it, and laughed, so vast was the difference. And long after dinner he
      laughed again when the condition of the “cape” recurred to his
      mind. He dined cheerfully, and after dinner wrote nothing, but took his
      ease for a while on the bed, until it got dark. Then he dressed himself
      leisurely, put on his cloak, and stepped out into the street.
    

      Where the host lived, unfortunately we cannot say. Our memory begins to
      fail us badly. The houses and streets in St. Petersburg have become so
      mixed up in our head that it is very difficult to get anything out of it
      again in proper form. This much is certain, that the official lived in the
      best part of the city; and therefore it must have been anything but near
      to Akaky Akakiyevich’s residence. Akaky Akakiyevich was first
      obliged to traverse a kind of wilderness of deserted, dimly-lighted
      streets. But in proportion as he approached the official’s quarter
      of the city, the streets became more lively, more populous, and more
      brilliantly illuminated. Pedestrians began to appear; handsomely dressed
      ladies were more frequently encountered; the men had otter skin collars to
      their coats; shabby sleigh-men with their wooden, railed sledges stuck
      over with brass-headed nails, became rarer; whilst on the other hand, more
      and more drivers in red velvet caps, lacquered sledges and bear-skin coats
      began to appear, and carriages with rich hammer-cloths flew swiftly
      through the streets, their wheels scrunching the snow.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich gazed upon all this as upon a novel sight. He had not
      been in the streets during the evening for years. He halted out of
      curiosity before a shop-window, to look at a picture representing a
      handsome woman, who had thrown off her shoe, thereby baring her whole foot
      in a very pretty way; whilst behind her the head of a man with whiskers
      and a handsome moustache peeped through the doorway of another room. Akaky
      Akakiyevich shook his head, and laughed, and then went on his way. Why did
      he laugh? Either because he had met with a thing utterly unknown, but for
      which every one cherishes, nevertheless, some sort of feeling, or else he
      thought, like many officials, “Well, those French! What is to be
      said? If they do go in for anything of that sort, why—” But
      possibly he did not think at all.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich at length reached the house in which the head clerk’s
      assistant lodged. He lived in fine style. The staircase was lit by a lamp,
      his apartment being on the second floor. On entering the vestibule, Akaky
      Akakiyevich beheld a whole row of goloshes on the floor. Among them, in
      the centre of the room, stood a samovar, humming and emitting clouds of
      steam. On the walls hung all sorts of coats and cloaks, among which there
      were even some with beaver collars, or velvet facings. Beyond, the buzz of
      conversation was audible, and became clear and loud, when the servant came
      out with a trayful of empty glasses, cream-jugs and sugar-bowls. It was
      evident that the officials had arrived long before, and had already
      finished their first glass of tea.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich, having hung up his own cloak, entered the inner room.
      Before him all at once appeared lights, officials, pipes, and card-tables,
      and he was bewildered by a sound of rapid conversation rising from all the
      tables, and the noise of moving chairs. He halted very awkwardly in the
      middle of the room, wondering what he ought to do. But they had seen him.
      They received him with a shout, and all thronged at once into the
      ante-room, and there took another look at his cloak. Akaky Akakiyevich,
      although somewhat confused, was frank-hearted, and could not refrain from
      rejoicing when he saw how they praised his cloak. Then, of course, they
      all dropped him and his cloak, and returned, as was proper, to the tables
      set out for whist.
    

      All this, the noise, the talk, and the throng of people, was rather
      overwhelming to Akaky Akakiyevich. He simply did not know where he stood,
      or where to put his hands, his feet, and his whole body. Finally he sat
      down by the players, looked at the cards, gazed at the face of one and
      another, and after a while began to gape, and to feel that it was
      wearisome, the more so, as the hour was already long past when he usually
      went to bed. He wanted to take leave of the host, but they would not let
      him go, saying that he must not fail to drink a glass of champagne, in
      honour of his new garment. In the course of an hour, supper, consisting of
      vegetable salad, cold veal, pastry, confectioner’s pies, and
      champagne, was served. They made Akaky Akakiyevich drink two glasses of
      champagne, after which he felt things grow livelier.
    

      Still, he could not forget that it was twelve o’clock, and that he
      should have been at home long ago. In order that the host might not think
      of some excuse for detaining him, he stole out of the room quickly, sought
      out, in the ante-room, his cloak, which, to his sorrow, he found lying on
      the floor, brushed it, picked off every speck upon it, put it on his
      shoulders, and descended the stairs to the street.
    

      In the street all was still bright. Some petty shops, those permanent
      clubs of servants and all sorts of folks, were open. Others were shut,
      but, nevertheless, showed a streak of light the whole length of the
      door-crack, indicating that they were not yet free of company, and that
      probably some domestics, male and female, were finishing their stories and
      conversations, whilst leaving their masters in complete ignorance as to
      their whereabouts. Akaky Akakiyevich went on in a happy frame of mind. He
      even started to run, without knowing why, after some lady, who flew past
      like a flash of lightning. But he stopped short, and went on very quietly
      as before, wondering why he had quickened his pace. Soon there spread
      before him these deserted streets which are not cheerful in the daytime,
      to say no thing of the evening. Now they were even more dim and lonely.
      The lanterns began to grow rarer, oil, evidently, had been less liberally
      supplied. Then came wooden houses and fences. Not a soul anywhere; only
      the snow sparkled in the streets, and mournfully veiled the low-roofed
      cabins with their closed shutters. He approached the spot where the street
      crossed a vast square with houses barely visible on its farther side, a
      square which seemed a fearful desert.
    

      Afar, a tiny spark glimmered from some watchman’s-box, which seemed
      to stand on the edge of the world. Akaky Akakiyevich’s cheerfulness
      diminished at this point in a marked degree. He entered the square, not
      without an involuntary sensation of fear, as though his heart warned him
      of some evil. He glanced back, and on both sides it was like a sea about
      him. “No, it is better not to look,” he thought, and went on,
      closing his eyes. When he opened them, to see whether he was near the end
      of the square, he suddenly beheld, standing just before his very nose,
      some bearded individuals of precisely what sort, he could not make out.
      All grew dark before his eyes, and his heart throbbed.
    

      “Of course, the cloak is mine!” said one of them in a loud
      voice, seizing hold of his collar. Akaky Akakiyevich was about to shout
      “Help!” when the second man thrust a fist, about the size of
      an official’s head, at his very mouth, muttering, “Just you
      dare to scream!”
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich felt them strip off his cloak, and give him a kick. He
      fell headlong upon the snow, and felt no more.
    

      In a few minutes he recovered consciousness, and rose to his feet, but no
      one was there. He felt that it was cold in the square, and that his cloak
      was gone. He began to shout, but his voice did not appear to reach the
      outskirts of the square. In despair, but without ceasing to shout, he
      started at a run across the square, straight towards the watch-box, beside
      which stood the watchman, leaning on his halberd, and apparently curious
      to know what kind of a customer was running towards him shouting. Akaky
      Akakiyevich ran up to him, and began in a sobbing voice to shout that he
      was asleep, and attended to nothing, and did not see when a man was
      robbed. The watchman replied that he had seen two men stop him in the
      middle of the square, but supposed that they were friends of his, and
      that, instead of scolding vainly, he had better go to the police on the
      morrow, so that they might make a search for whoever had stolen the cloak.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich ran home and arrived in a state of complete disorder,
      his hair which grew very thinly upon his temples and the back of his head
      all tousled, his body, arms and legs, covered with snow. The old woman,
      who was mistress of his lodgings, on hearing a terrible knocking, sprang
      hastily from her bed, and, with only one shoe on, ran to open the door,
      pressing the sleeve of her chemise to her bosom out of modesty. But when
      she had opened it, she fell back on beholding Akaky Akakiyevich in such a
      condition. When he told her about the affair, she clasped her hands, and
      said that he must go straight to the district chief of police, for his
      subordinate would turn up his nose, promise well, and drop the matter
      there. The very best thing to do, therefore, would be to go to the
      district chief, whom she knew, because Finnish Anna, her former cook, was
      now nurse at his house. She often saw him passing the house, and he was at
      church every Sunday, praying, but at the same time gazing cheerfully at
      everybody; so that he must be a good man, judging from all appearances.
      Having listened to this opinion, Akaky Akakiyevich betook himself sadly to
      his room. And how he spent the night there, any one who can put himself in
      another’s place may readily imagine.
    

      Early in the morning, he presented himself at the district chief’s,
      but was told the official was asleep. He went again at ten and was again
      informed that he was asleep. At eleven, and they said, “The
      superintendent is not at home.” At dinner time, and the clerks in
      the ante-room would not admit him on any terms, and insisted upon knowing
      his business. So that at last, for once in his life, Akaky Akakiyevich
      felt an inclination to show some spirit, and said curtly that he must see
      the chief in person, that they ought not to presume to refuse him
      entrance, that he came from the department of justice, and that when he
      complained of them, they would see.
    

      The clerks dared make no reply to this, and one of them went to call the
      chief, who listened to the strange story of the theft of the coat. Instead
      of directing his attention to the principal points of the matter, he began
      to question Akaky Akakiyevich. Why was he going home so late? Was he in
      the habit of doing so, or had he been to some disorderly house? So that
      Akaky Akakiyevich got thoroughly confused, and left him, without knowing
      whether the affair of his cloak was in proper train or not.
    

      All that day, for the first time in his life, he never went near the
      department. The next day he made his appearance, very pale, and in his old
      cape, which had become even more shabby. The news of the robbery of the
      cloak touched many, although there were some officials present who never
      lost an opportunity, even such a one as the present, of ridiculing Akaky
      Akakiyevich. They decided to make a collection for him on the spot, but
      the officials had already spent a great deal in subscribing for the
      director’s portrait, and for some book, at the suggestion of the
      head of that division, who was a friend of the author; and so the sum was
      trifling.
    

      One of them, moved by pity, resolved to help Akaky Akakiyevich with some
      good advice, at least, and told him that he ought not to go to the police,
      for although it might happen that a police-officer, wishing to win the
      approval of his superiors, might hunt up the cloak by some means, still,
      his cloak would remain in the possession of the police if he did not offer
      legal proof that it belonged to him. The best thing for him, therefore,
      would be to apply to a certain prominent personage; since this prominent
      personage, by entering into relation with the proper persons, could
      greatly expedite the matter.
    

      As there was nothing else to be done, Akaky Akakiyevich decided to go to
      the prominent personage. What was the exact official position of the
      prominent personage, remains unknown to this day. The reader must know
      that the prominent personage had but recently become a prominent
      personage, having up to that time been only an insignificant person.
      Moreover, his present position was not considered prominent in comparison
      with others still more so. But there is always a circle of people to whom
      what is insignificant in the eyes of others, is important enough.
      Moreover, he strove to increase his importance by sundry devices. For
      instance, he managed to have the inferior officials meet him on the
      staircase when he entered upon his service; no one was to presume to come
      directly to him, but the strictest etiquette must be observed; the
      collegiate recorder must make a report to the government secretary, the
      government secretary to the titular councillor, or whatever other man was
      proper, and all business must come before him in this manner. In Holy
      Russia, all is thus contaminated with the love of imitation; every man
      imitates and copies his superior. They even say that a certain titular
      councillor, when promoted to the head of some small separate office,
      immediately partitioned off a private room for himself, called it the
      audience chamber, and posted at the door a lackey with red collar and
      braid, who grasped the handle of the door, and opened to all comers,
      though the audience chamber would hardly hold an ordinary writing table.
    

      The manners and customs of the prominent personage were grand and
      imposing, but rather exaggerated. The main foundation of his system was
      strictness. “Strictness, strictness, and always strictness!”
      he generally said; and at the last word he looked significantly into the
      face of the person to whom he spoke. But there was no necessity for this,
      for the halfscore of subordinates, who formed the entire force of the
      office, were properly afraid. On catching sight of him afar off, they left
      their work, and waited, drawn up in line, until he had passed through the
      room. His ordinary converse with his inferiors smacked of sternness, and
      consisted chiefly of three phrases: “How dare you?” “Do
      you know whom you are speaking to?” “Do you realise who is
      standing before you?”
    

      Otherwise he was a very kind-hearted man, good to his comrades, and ready
      to oblige. But the rank of general threw him completely off his balance.
      On receiving any one of that rank, he became confused, lost his way, as it
      were, and never knew what to do. If he chanced to be amongst his equals,
      he was still a very nice kind of man, a very good fellow in many respects,
      and not stupid, but the very moment that he found himself in the society
      of people but one rank lower than himself, he became silent. And his
      situation aroused sympathy, the more so, as he felt himself that he might
      have been making an incomparably better use of his time. In his eyes,
      there was sometimes visible a desire to join some interesting conversation
      or group, but he was kept back by the thought, “Would it not be a
      very great condescension on his part? Would it not be familiar? And would
      he not thereby lose his importance?” And in consequence of such
      reflections, he always remained in the same dumb state, uttering from time
      to time a few monosyllabic sounds, and thereby earning the name of the
      most wearisome of men.
    

      To this prominent personage Akaky Akakiyevich presented himself, and this
      at the most unfavourable time for himself, though opportune for the
      prominent personage. The prominent personage was in his cabinet,
      conversing very gaily with an old acquaintance and companion of his
      childhood, whom he had not seen for several years, and who had just
      arrived, when it was announced to him that a person named Bashmachkin had
      come. He asked abruptly, “Who is he?”—“Some
      official,” he was informed. “Ah, he can wait! This is no time
      for him to call,” said the important man.
    

      It must be remarked here that the important man lied outrageously. He had
      said all he had to say to his friend long before, and the conversation had
      been interspersed for some time with very long pauses, during which they
      merely slapped each other on the leg, and said, “You think so, Ivan
      Abramovich!” “Just so, Stepan Varlamovich!”
      Nevertheless, he ordered that the official should be kept waiting, in
      order to show his friend, a man who had not been in the service for a long
      time, but had lived at home in the country, how long officials had to wait
      in his ante-room.
    

      At length, having talked himself completely out, and more than that,
      having had his fill of pauses, and smoked a cigar in a very comfortable
      arm-chair with reclining back, he suddenly seemed to recollect, and said
      to the secretary, who stood by the door with papers of reports, “So
      it seems that there is an official waiting to see me. Tell him that he may
      come in.” On perceiving Akaky Akakiyevich’s modest mien and
      his worn uniform, he turned abruptly to him, and said, “What do you
      want?” in a curt hard voice, which he had practised in his room in
      private, and before the looking-glass, for a whole week before being
      raised to his present rank.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich, who was already imbued with a due amount of fear,
      became somewhat confused, and as well as his tongue would permit,
      explained, with a rather more frequent addition than usual of the word
      “that” that his cloak was quite new, and had been stolen in
      the most inhuman manner; that he had applied to him, in order that he
      might, in some way, by his intermediation—that he might enter into
      correspondence with the chief of police, and find the cloak.
    

      For some inexplicable reason, this conduct seemed familiar to the
      prominent personage.
    

      “What, my dear sir!” he said abruptly, “are you not
      acquainted with etiquette? To whom have you come? Don’t you know how
      such matters are managed? You should first have presented a petition to
      the office. It would have gone to the head of the department, then to the
      chief of the division, then it would have been handed over to the
      secretary, and the secretary would have given it to me.”
    

      “But, your excellency,” said Akaky Akakiyevich, trying to
      collect his small handful of wits, and conscious at the same time that he
      was perspiring terribly, “I, your excellency, presumed to trouble
      you because secretaries—are an untrustworthy race.”
    

      “What, what, what!” said the important personage. “Where
      did you get such courage? Where did you get such ideas? What impudence
      towards their chiefs and superiors has spread among the young generation!”
      The prominent personage apparently had not observed that Akaky Akakiyevich
      was already in the neighbourhood of fifty. If he could be called a young
      man, it must have been in comparison with some one who was seventy.
      “Do you know to whom you are speaking? Do you realise who is
      standing before you? Do you realise it? Do you realise it, I ask you!”
      Then he stamped his foot, and raised his voice to such a pitch that it
      would have frightened even a different man from Akaky Akakiyevich.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich’s senses failed him. He staggered, trembled in
      every limb, and, if the porters had not run in to support him, would have
      fallen to the floor. They carried him out insensible. But the prominent
      personage, gratified that the effect should have surpassed his
      expectations, and quite intoxicated with the thought that his word could
      even deprive a man of his senses, glanced sideways at his friend in order
      to see how he looked upon this, and perceived, not without satisfaction,
      that his friend was in a most uneasy frame of mind, and even beginning on
      his part, to feel a trifle frightened.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich could not remember how he descended the stairs, and got
      into the street. He felt neither his hands nor feet. Never in his life had
      he been so rated by any high official, let alone a strange one. He went
      staggering on through the snow-storm, which was blowing in the streets,
      with his mouth wide open. The wind, in St. Petersburg fashion, darted upon
      him from all quarters, and down every cross-street. In a twinkling it had
      blown a quinsy into his throat, and he reached home unable to utter a
      word. His throat was swollen, and he lay down on his bed. So powerful is
      sometimes a good scolding!
    

      The next day a violent fever developed. Thanks to the generous assistance
      of the St. Petersburg climate, the malady progressed more rapidly than
      could have been expected, and when the doctor arrived, he found, on
      feeling the sick man’s pulse, that there was nothing to be done,
      except to prescribe a poultice, so that the patient might not be left
      entirely without the beneficent aid of medicine. But at the same time, he
      predicted his end in thirty-six hours. After this he turned to the
      landlady, and said, “And as for you, don’t waste your time on
      him. Order his pine coffin now, for an oak one will be too expensive for
      him.”
    

      Did Akaky Akakiyevich hear these fatal words? And if he heard them, did
      they produce any overwhelming effect upon him? Did he lament the
      bitterness of his life?—We know not, for he continued in a delirious
      condition. Visions incessantly appeared to him, each stranger than the
      other. Now he saw Petrovich, and ordered him to make a cloak, with some
      traps for robbers, who seemed to him to be always under the bed; and he
      cried every moment to the landlady to pull one of them from under his
      coverlet. Then he inquired why his old mantle hung before him when he had
      a new cloak. Next he fancied that he was standing before the prominent
      person, listening to a thorough setting-down and saying, “Forgive
      me, your excellency!” but at last he began to curse, uttering the
      most horrible words, so that his aged landlady crossed herself, never in
      her life having heard anything of the kind from him, and more so as these
      words followed directly after the words “your excellency.”
      Later on he talked utter nonsense, of which nothing could be made, all
      that was evident being that these incoherent words and thoughts hovered
      ever about one thing, his cloak.
    

      At length poor Akaky Akakiyevich breathed his last. They sealed up neither
      his room nor his effects, because, in the first place, there were no
      heirs, and, in the second, there was very little to inherit beyond a
      bundle of goose-quills, a quire of white official paper, three pairs of
      socks, two or three buttons which had burst off his trousers, and the
      mantle already known to the reader. To whom all this fell, God knows. I
      confess that the person who told me this tale took no interest in the
      matter. They carried Akaky Akakiyevich out, and buried him.
    

      And St. Petersburg was left without Akaky Akakiyevich, as though he had
      never lived there. A being disappeared, who was protected by none, dear to
      none, interesting to none, and who never even attracted to himself the
      attention of those students of human nature who omit no opportunity of
      thrusting a pin through a common fly and examining it under the
      microscope. A being who bore meekly the jibes of the department, and went
      to his grave without having done one unusual deed, but to whom,
      nevertheless, at the close of his life, appeared a bright visitant in the
      form of a cloak, which momentarily cheered his poor life, and upon him,
      thereafter, an intolerable misfortune descended, just as it descends upon
      the heads of the mighty of this world!
    

      Several days after his death, the porter was sent from the department to
      his lodgings, with an order for him to present himself there immediately,
      the chief commanding it. But the porter had to return unsuccessful, with
      the answer that he could not come; and to the question, “Why?”
      replied, “Well, because he is dead! he was buried four days ago.”
      In this manner did they hear of Akaky Akakiyevich’s death at the
      department. And the next day a new official sat in his place, with a
      handwriting by no means so upright, but more inclined and slanting.
    

      But who could have imagined that this was not really the end of Akaky
      Akakiyevich, that he was destined to raise a commotion after death, as if
      in compensation for his utterly insignificant life? But so it happened,
      and our poor story unexpectedly gains a fantastic ending.
    

      A rumour suddenly spread through St. Petersburg, that a dead man had taken
      to appearing on the KaFlinkin Bridge, and its vicinity, at night in the
      form of an official seeking a stolen cloak, and that, under the pretext of
      its being the stolen cloak, he dragged, without regard to rank or calling,
      every one’s cloak from his shoulders, be it cat-skin, beaver, fox,
      bear, sable, in a word, every sort of fur and skin which men adopted for
      their covering. One of the department officials saw the dead man with his
      own eyes, and immediately recognised in him Akaky Akakiyevich. This,
      however, inspired him with such terror, that he ran off with all his
      might, and therefore did not scan the dead man closely, but only saw how
      the latter threatened him from afar with his finger. Constant complaints
      poured in from all quarters, that the backs and shoulders, not only of
      titular but even of court councillors, were exposed to the danger of a
      cold, on account of the frequent dragging off of their cloaks.
    

      Arrangements were made by the police to catch the corpse, alive or dead,
      at any cost, and punish him as an example to others, in the most severe
      manner. In this they nearly succeeded, for a watchman, on guard in
      Kirinshkin Lane, caught the corpse by the collar on the very scene of his
      evil deeds, when attempting to pull off the frieze cloak of a retired
      musician. Having seized him by the collar, he summoned, with a shout, two
      of his comrades, whom he enjoined to hold him fast, while he himself felt
      for a moment in his boot, in order to draw out his snuff-box, and refresh
      his frozen nose. But the snuff was of a sort which even a corpse could not
      endure. The watchman having closed his right nostril with his finger, had
      no sooner succeeded in holding half a handful up to the left, than the
      corpse sneezed so violently that he completely filled the eyes of all
      three. While they raised their hands to wipe them, the dead man vanished
      completely, so that they positively did not know whether they had actually
      had him in their grip at all. Thereafter the watchmen conceived such a
      terror of dead men that they were afraid even to seize the living, and
      only screamed from a distance. “Hey, there! go your way!” So
      the dead official began to appear even beyond the KaFlinkin Bridge,
      causing no little terror to all timid people.
    

      But we have totally neglected that certain prominent personage who may
      really be considered as the cause of the fantastic turn taken by this true
      history. First of all, justice compels us to say, that after the departure
      of poor, annihilated Akaky Akakiyevich, he felt something like remorse.
      Suffering was unpleasant to him, for his heart was accessible to many good
      impulses, in spite of the fact that his rank often prevented his showing
      his true self. As soon as his friend had left his cabinet, he began to
      think about poor Akaky Akakiyevich. And from that day forth, poor Akaky
      Akakiyevich, who could not bear up under an official reprimand, recurred
      to his mind almost every day. The thought troubled him to such an extent,
      that a week later he even resolved to send an official to him, to learn
      whether he really could assist him. And when it was reported to him that
      Akaky Akakiyevich had died suddenly of fever, he was startled, hearkened
      to the reproaches of his conscience, and was out of sorts for the whole
      day.
    

      Wishing to divert his mind in some way and drive away the disagreeable
      impression, he set out that evening for one of his friends’ houses,
      where he found quite a large party assembled. What was better, nearly
      every one was of the same rank as himself, so that he need not feel in the
      least constrained. This had a marvellous effect upon his mental state. He
      grew expansive, made himself agreeable in conversation, in short, he
      passed a delightful evening. After supper he drank a couple of glasses of
      champagne—not a bad recipe for cheerfulness, as every one knows. The
      champagne inclined him to various adventures, and he determined not to
      return home, but to go and see a certain well-known lady, of German
      extraction, Karolina Ivanovna, a lady, it appears, with whom he was on a
      very friendly footing.
    

      It must be mentioned that the prominent personage was no longer a young
      man, but a good husband and respected father of a family. Two sons, one of
      whom was already in the service, and a good-looking, sixteen-year-old
      daughter, with a slightly arched but pretty little nose, came every
      morning to kiss his hand and say, “Bon jour, papa.” His
      wife, a still fresh and good-looking woman, first gave him her hand to
      kiss, and then, reversing the procedure, kissed his. But the prominent
      personage, though perfectly satisfied in his domestic relations,
      considered it stylish to have a friend in another quarter of the city.
      This friend was scarcely prettier or younger than his wife; but there are
      such puzzles in the world, and it is not our place to judge them. So the
      important personage descended the stairs, stepped into his sledge, said to
      the coachman, “To Karolina Ivanovna’s,” and, wrapping
      himself luxuriously in his warm cloak, found himself in that delightful
      frame of mind than which a Russian can conceive nothing better, namely,
      when you think of nothing yourself, yet when the thoughts creep into your
      mind of their own accord, each more agreeable than the other, giving you
      no trouble either to drive them away, or seek them. Fully satisfied, he
      recalled all the gay features of the evening just passed and all the mots
      which had made the little circle laugh. Many of them he repeated in a low
      voice, and found them quite as funny as before; so it is not surprising
      that he should laugh heartily at them. Occasionally, however, he was
      interrupted by gusts of wind, which, coming suddenly, God knows whence or
      why, cut his face, drove masses of snow into it, filled out his
      cloak-collar like a sail, or suddenly blew it over his head with
      supernatural force, and thus caused him constant trouble to disentangle
      himself.
    

      Suddenly the important personage felt some one clutch him firmly by the
      collar. Turning round, he perceived a man of short stature, in an old,
      worn uniform, and recognised, not without terror, Akaky Akakiyevich. The
      official’s face was white as snow, and looked just like a corpse’s.
      But the horror of the important personage transcended all bounds when he
      saw the dead man’s mouth open, and heard it utter the following
      remarks, while it breathed upon him the terrible odour of the grave:
      “Ah, here you are at last! I have you, that—by the collar! I
      need your cloak. You took no trouble about mine, but reprimanded me. So
      now give up your own.”
    

      The pallid prominent personage almost died of fright. Brave as he was in
      the office and in the presence of inferiors generally, and although, at
      the sight of his manly form and appearance, every one said, “Ugh!
      how much character he has!” at this crisis, he, like many possessed
      of an heroic exterior, experienced such terror, that, not without cause,
      he began to fear an attack of illness. He flung his cloak hastily from his
      shoulders and shouted to his coachman in an unnatural voice, “Home
      at full speed!” The coachman, hearing the tone which is generally
      employed at critical moments, and even accompanied by something much more
      tangible, drew his head down between his shoulders in case of an
      emergency, flourished his whip, and flew on like an arrow. In a little
      more than six minutes the prominent personage was at the entrance of his
      own house. Pale, thoroughly scared, and cloakless, he went home instead of
      to Karolina Ivanovna’s, reached his room somehow or other, and
      passed the night in the direst distress; so that the next morning over
      their tea, his daughter said, “You are very pale to-day, papa.”
      But papa remained silent, and said not a word to any one of what had
      happened to him, where he had been, or where he had intended to go.
    

      This occurrence made a deep impression upon him. He even began to say,
      “How dare you? Do you realise who is standing before you?”
      less frequently to the under-officials, and, if he did utter the words, it
      was only after first having learned the bearings of the matter. But the
      most noteworthy point was, that from that day forward the apparition of
      the dead official ceased to be seen. Evidently the prominent personage’s
      cloak just fitted his shoulders. At all events, no more instances of his
      dragging cloaks from people’s shoulders were heard of. But many
      active and solicitous persons could by no means reassure themselves, and
      asserted that the dead official still showed himself in distant parts of
      the city.
    

      In fact, one watchman in Kolomen saw with his own eyes the apparition come
      from behind a house. But the watchman was not a strong man, so he was
      afraid to arrest him, and followed him in the dark, until, at length, the
      apparition looked round, paused, and inquired, “What do you want?”
      at the same time showing such a fist as is never seen on living men. The
      watchman said, “Nothing,” and turned back instantly. But the
      apparition was much too tall, wore huge moustaches, and, directing its
      steps apparently towards the Obukhov Bridge, disappeared in the darkness
      of the night.
    











      THE DISTRICT DOCTOR
    

      BY IVAN S. TURGENEV
    

One day in autumn
      on my way back from a remote part of the country I caught cold and fell
      ill. Fortunately the fever attacked me in the district town at the inn; I
      sent for the doctor. In half-an-hour the district doctor appeared, a thin,
      dark-haired man of middle height. He prescribed me the usual sudorific,
      ordered a mustard-plaster to be put on, very deftly slid a five-ruble note
      up his sleeve, coughing drily and looking away as he did so, and then was
      getting up to go home, but somehow fell into talk and remained. I was
      exhausted with feverishness; I foresaw a sleepless night, and was glad of
      a little chat with a pleasant companion. Tea was served. My doctor began
      to converse freely. He was a sensible fellow, and expressed himself with
      vigour and some humour. Queer things happen in the world: you may live a
      long while with some people, and be on friendly terms with them, and never
      once speak openly with them from your soul; with others you have scarcely
      time to get acquainted, and all at once you are pouring out to him—or
      he to you—all your secrets, as though you were at confession. I don’t
      know how I gained the confidence of my new friend—anyway, with
      nothing to lead up to it, he told me a rather curious incident; and here I
      will report his tale for the information of the indulgent reader. I will
      try to tell it in the doctor’s own words.
    

      “You don’t happen to know,” he began in a weak and
      quavering voice (the common result of the use of unmixed Berezov snuff);
      “you don’t happen to know the judge here, Mylov, Pavel
      Lukich?... You don’t know him?... Well, it’s all the same.”
      (He cleared his throat and rubbed his eyes.) “Well, you see, the
      thing happened, to tell you exactly without mistake, in Lent, at the very
      time of the thaws. I was sitting at his house—our judge’s, you
      know—playing preference. Our judge is a good fellow, and fond of
      playing preference. Suddenly” (the doctor made frequent use of this
      word, suddenly) “they tell me, ‘There’s a servant asking
      for you.’ I say, ‘What does he want?’ They say, He has
      brought a note—it must be from a patient.’ ‘Give me the
      note,’ I say. So it is from a patient—well and good—you
      understand—it’s our bread and butter... But this is how it
      was: a lady, a widow, writes to me; she says, ‘My daughter is dying.
      Come, for God’s sake!’ she says, ‘and the horses have
      been sent for you.’... Well, that’s all right. But she was
      twenty miles from the town, and it was midnight out of doors, and the
      roads in such a state, my word! And as she was poor herself, one could not
      expect more than two silver rubles, and even that problematic; and perhaps
      it might only be a matter of a roll of linen and a sack of oatmeal in payment.
      However, duty, you know, before everything: a fellow-creature may be
      dying. I hand over my cards at once to Kalliopin, the member of the
      provincial commission, and return home. I look; a wretched little trap was
      standing at the steps, with peasant’s horses, fat—too fat—and
      their coat as shaggy as felt; and the coachman sitting with his cap off
      out of respect. Well, I think to myself, ‘It’s clear, my
      friend, these patients aren’t rolling in riches.’... You
      smile; but I tell you, a poor man like me has to take everything into
      consideration... If the coachman sits like a prince, and doesn’t
      touch his cap, and even sneers at you behind his beard, and flicks his
      whip—then you may bet on six rubles. But this case, I saw, had a
      very different air. However, I think there’s no help for it; duty
      before everything. I snatch up the most necessary drugs, and set off. Will
      you believe it? I only just managed to get there at all. The road was
      infernal: streams, snow, watercourses, and the dyke had suddenly burst
      there—that was the worst of it! However, I arrived at last. It was a
      little thatched house. There was a light in the windows; that meant they
      expected me. I was met by an old lady, very venerable, in a cap. ‘Save
      her!’ she says; ‘she is dying.’ I say, 'Pray don’t
      distress yourself—Where is the invalid?’ ‘Come this way.’
      I see a clean little room, a lamp in the corner; on the bed a girl of
      twenty, unconscious. She was in a burning heat, and breathing heavily—it
      was fever. There were two other girls, her sisters, scared and in tears.
      ‘Yesterday,’ they tell me, ‘she was perfectly well and
      had a good appetite; this morning she complained of her head, and this
      evening, suddenly, you see, like this.’ I say again: ‘Pray don’t
      be uneasy.’ It’s a doctor’s duty, you know—and I
      went up to her and bled her, told them to put on a mustard-plaster, and
      prescribed a mixture. Meantime I looked at her; I looked at her, you know—there,
      by God! I had never seen such a face!—she was a beauty, in a word! I
      felt quite shaken with pity. Such lovely features; such eyes!... But,
      thank God! she became easier; she fell into a perspiration, seemed to come
      to her senses, looked round, smiled, and passed her hand over her face...
      Her sisters bent over her. They ask, ‘How are you?’ ‘All
      right,’ she says, and turns away. I looked at her; she had fallen
      asleep. ‘Well,’ I say, 'now the patient should be left alone.’
      So we all went out on tiptoe; only a maid remained, in case she was
      wanted. In the parlour there was a samovar standing on the table, and a
      bottle of rum; in our profession one can’t get on without it. They
      gave me tea; asked me to stop the night... I consented: where could I go,
      indeed, at that time of night? The old lady kept groaning. ‘What is
      it?’ I say; ‘she will live; don’t worry yourself; you
      had better take a little rest yourself; it is about two o’clock.’
      ‘But will you send to wake me if anything happens?’ ‘Yes,
      yes.’ The old lady went away, and the girls too went to their own
      room; they made up a bed for me in the parlour. Well, I went to bed—but
      I could not get to sleep, for a wonder! for in reality I was very tired. I
      could not get my patient out of my head. At last I could not put up with
      it any longer; I got up suddenly; I think to myself, ‘I will go and
      see how the patient is getting on.’ Her bedroom was next to the
      parlour. Well, I got up, and gently opened the door—how my heart
      beat! I looked in: the servant was asleep, her mouth wide open, and even
      snoring, the wretch! but the patient lay with her face towards me and her
      arms flung wide apart, poor girl! I went up to her ... when suddenly she
      opened her eyes and stared at me! ‘Who is it? who is it?’ I
      was in confusion. ‘Don’t be alarmed, madam,’ I say;
      ‘I am the doctor; I have come to see how you feel.’ ‘You
      the doctor?’ ‘Yes, the doctor; your mother sent for me from
      the town; we have bled you, madam; now pray go to sleep, and in a day or
      two, please God! we will set you on your feet again.’ ‘Ah,
      yes, yes, doctor, don’t let me die... please, please.’ ‘Why
      do you talk like that? God bless you!’ She is in a fever again, I
      think to myself; I felt her pulse; yes, she was feverish. She looked at
      me, and then took me by the hand. ‘I will tell you why I don’t
      want to die: I will tell you... Now we are alone; and only, please don’t
      you ... not to any one ... Listen...’ I bent down; she moved her
      lips quite to my ear; she touched my cheek with her hair—I confess
      my head went round—and began to whisper... I could make out nothing
      of it... Ah, she was delirious! ... She whispered and whispered, but so
      quickly, and as if it were not in Russian; at last she finished, and
      shivering dropped her head on the pillow, and threatened me with her
      finger: 'Remember, doctor, to no one.’ I calmed her somehow, gave
      her something to drink, waked the servant, and went away.”
    

      At this point the doctor again took snuff with exasperated energy, and for
      a moment seemed stupefied by its effects.
    

      “However,” he continued, “the next day, contrary to my
      expectations, the patient was no better. I thought and thought, and
      suddenly decided to remain there, even though my other patients were
      expecting me... And you know one can’t afford to disregard that; one’s
      practice suffers if one does. But, in the first place, the patient was
      really in danger; and secondly, to tell the truth, I felt strongly drawn
      to her. Besides, I liked the whole family. Though they were really badly
      off, they were singularly, I may say, cultivated people... Their father
      had been a learned man, an author; he died, of course, in poverty, but he
      had managed before he died to give his children an excellent education; he
      left a lot of books too. Either because I looked after the invalid very
      carefully, or for some other reason; anyway, I can venture to say all the
      household loved me as if I were one of the family... Meantime the roads
      were in a worse state than ever; all communications, so to say, were cut
      off completely; even medicine could with difficulty be got from the
      town... The sick girl was not getting better... Day after day, and day
      after day ... but ... here...” (The doctor made a brief pause.)
      “I declare I don’t know how to tell you.”... (He again
      took snuff, coughed, and swallowed a little tea.) “I will tell you
      without beating about the bush. My patient ... how should I say?... Well
      she had fallen in love with me ... or, no, it was not that she was in love
      ... however ... really, how should one say?” (The doctor looked down
      and grew red.) “No,” he went on quickly, “in love,
      indeed! A man should not over-estimate himself. She was an educated girl,
      clever and well-read, and I had even forgotten my Latin, one may say,
      completely. As to appearance” (the doctor looked himself over with a
      smile) “I am nothing to boast of there either. But God Almighty did
      not make me a fool; I don’t take black for white; I know a thing or
      two; I could see very clearly, for instance that Aleksandra Andreyevna—that
      was her name—did not feel love for me, but had a friendly, so to
      say, inclination—a respect or something for me. Though she herself
      perhaps mistook this sentiment, anyway this was her attitude; you may form
      your own judgment of it. But,” added the doctor, who had brought out
      all these disconnected sentences without taking breath, and with obvious
      embarrassment, “I seem to be wandering rather—you won’t
      understand anything like this ... There, with your leave, I will relate it
      all in order.”
    

      He drank off a glass of tea, and began in a calmer voice.
    

      “Well, then. My patient kept getting worse and worse. You are not a
      doctor, my good sir; you cannot understand what passes in a poor fellow’s
      heart, especially at first, when he begins to suspect that the disease is
      getting the upper hand of him. What becomes of his belief in himself? You
      suddenly grow so timid; it’s indescribable. You fancy then that you
      have forgotten everything you knew, and that the patient has no faith in
      you, and that other people begin to notice how distracted you are, and
      tell you the symptoms with reluctance; that they are looking at you
      suspiciously, whispering... Ah! it’s horrid! There must be a remedy,
      you think, for this disease, if one could find it. Isn’t this it?
      You try—no, that’s not it! You don’t allow the medicine
      the necessary time to do good... You clutch at one thing, then at another.
      Sometimes you take up a book of medical prescriptions—here it is,
      you think! Sometimes, by Jove, you pick one out by chance, thinking to
      leave it to fate... But meantime a fellow-creature’s dying, and
      another doctor would have saved him. ‘We must have a consultation,’
      you say; ‘I will not take the responsibility on myself.’ And
      what a fool you look at such times! Well, in time you learn to bear it; it’s
      nothing to you. A man has died—but it’s not your fault; you
      treated him by the rules. But what’s still more torture to you is to
      see blind faith in you, and to feel yourself that you are not able to be
      of use. Well, it was just this blind faith that the whole of Aleksandra
      Andreyevna’s family had in me; they had forgotten to think that
      their daughter was in danger. I, too, on my side assure them that it’s
      nothing, but meantime my heart sinks into my boots. To add to our
      troubles, the roads were in such a state that the coachman was gone for
      whole days together to get medicine. And I never left the patient’s
      room; I could not tear myself away; I tell her amusing stories, you know,
      and play cards with her. I watch by her side at night. The old mother
      thanks me with tears in her eyes; but I think to myself, ‘I don’t
      deserve your gratitude.’ I frankly confess to you—there is no
      object in concealing it now—I was in love with my patient. And
      Aleksandra Andreyevna had grown fond of me; she would not sometimes let
      any one be in her room but me. She began to talk to me, to ask me
      questions; where I had studied, how I lived, who are my people, whom I go
      to see. I feel that she ought not to talk; but to forbid her to—to
      forbid her resolutely, you know—I could not. Sometimes I held my
      head in my hands, and asked myself, “What are you doing, villain?”...
      And she would take my hand and hold it, give me a long, long look, and
      turn away, sigh, and say, ‘How good you are!’ Her hands were
      so feverish, her eyes so large and languid... 'Yes,’ she says,
      ‘you are a good, kind man; you are not like our neighbours... No,
      you are not like that... Why did I not know you till now!’ ‘Aleksandra
      Andreyevna, calm yourself,’ I say... ‘I feel, believe me, I
      don’t know how I have gained ... but there, calm yourself... All
      will be right; you will be well again.’ And meanwhile I must tell
      you,” continued the doctor, bending forward and raising his
      eyebrows, “that they associated very little with the neighbours,
      because the smaller people were not on their level, and pride hindered
      them from being friendly with the rich. I tell you, they were an
      exceptionally cultivated family; so you know it was gratifying for me. She
      would only take her medicine from my hands ... she would lift herself up,
      poor girl, with my aid, take it, and gaze at me... My heart felt as if it
      were bursting. And meanwhile she was growing worse and worse, worse and
      worse, all the time; she will die, I think to myself; she must die.
      Believe me, I would sooner have gone to the grave myself; and here were
      her mother and sisters watching me, looking into my eyes ... and their
      faith in me was wearing away. 'Well? how is she?’ ‘Oh, all
      right, all right!’ All right, indeed! My mind was failing me. Well,
      I was sitting one night alone again by my patient. The maid was sitting
      there too, and snoring away in full swing; I can’t find fault with
      the poor girl, though; she was worn out too. Aleksandra Andreyevna had
      felt very unwell all the evening; she was very feverish. Until midnight
      she kept tossing about; at last she seemed to fall asleep; at least, she
      lay still without stirring. The lamp was burning in the corner before the
      holy image. I sat there, you know, with my head bent; I even dozed a
      little. Suddenly it seemed as though some one touched me in the side; I
      turned round... Good God! Aleksandra Andreyevna was gazing with intent
      eyes at me ... her lips parted, her cheeks seemed burning. ‘What is
      it?’ ‘Doctor, shall I die?’ ‘Merciful Heavens!’
      ‘No, doctor, no; please don’t tell me I shall live ... don’t
      say so... If you knew... Listen! for God’s sake don’t conceal
      my real position,’ and her breath came so fast. ‘If I can know
      for certain that I must die ... then I will tell you all— all!’
      ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna, I beg!’ ‘Listen; I have not been
      asleep at all ... I have been looking at you a long while... For God’s
      sake!... I believe in you; you are a good man, an honest man; I entreat
      you by all that is sacred in the world—tell me the truth! If you
      knew how important it is for me... Doctor, for God’s sake tell me...
      Am I in danger?’ ‘What can I tell you, Aleksandra Andreyevna,
      pray?’ ‘For God’s sake, I beseech you!’ ‘I
      can’t disguise from you,’ I say, ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna;
      you are certainly in danger; but God is merciful.’ ‘I shall
      die, I shall die.’ And it seemed as though she were pleased; her
      face grew so bright; I was alarmed. ‘Don’t be afraid, don’t
      be afraid! I am not frightened of death at all.’ She suddenly sat up
      and leaned on her elbow. ‘Now ... yes, now I can tell you that I
      thank you with my whole heart ... that you are kind and good—that I
      love you!’ I stare at her, like one possessed; it was terrible for
      me, you know. ‘Do you hear, I love you!’ ‘Aleksandra
      Andreyevna, how have I deserved—’ ‘No, no, you don’t—you
      don’t understand me.’... And suddenly she stretched out her
      arms, and taking my head in her hands, she kissed it... Believe me, I
      almost screamed aloud... I threw myself on my knees, and buried my head in
      the pillow. She did not speak; her fingers trembled in my hair; I listen;
      she is weeping. I began to soothe her, to assure her... I really don’t
      know what I did say to her. ‘You will wake up the girl,’ I say
      to her; 'Aleksandra Andreyevna, I thank you ... believe me ... calm
      yourself.’ 'Enough, enough!’ she persisted; ‘never mind
      all of them; let them wake, then; let them come in—it does not
      matter; I am dying, you see... And what do you fear? why are you afraid?
      Lift up your head... Or, perhaps, you don’t love me; perhaps I am
      wrong... In that case, forgive me.’ ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna,
      what are you saying!... I love you, Aleksandra Andreyevna.’ She
      looked straight into my eyes, and opened her arms wide. ‘Then take
      me in your arms.’ I tell you frankly, I don’t know how it was
      I did not go mad that night. I feel that my patient is killing herself; I
      see that she is not fully herself; I understand, too, that if she did not
      consider herself on the point of death, she would never have thought of
      me; and, indeed, say what you will, it’s hard to die at twenty
      without having known love; this was what was torturing her; this was why,
      in despair, she caught at me—do you understand now? But she held me
      in her arms, and would not let me go. ‘Have pity on me, Aleksandra
      Andreyevna, and have pity on yourself,’ I say. ‘Why,’
      she says; ‘what is there to think of? You know I must die.’
      ... This she repeated incessantly ... ‘If I knew that I should
      return to life, and be a proper young lady again, I should be ashamed ...
      of course, ashamed ... but why now?’ ‘But who has said you
      will die?’ ‘Oh, no, leave off! you will not deceive me; you
      don’t know how to lie—look at your face.’ ... ‘You
      shall live, Aleksandra Andreyevna; I will cure you; we will ask your
      mother’s blessing ... we will be united—we will be happy.’
      ‘No, no, I have your word; I must die ... you have promised me ...
      you have told me.’ ... It was cruel for me—cruel for many
      reasons. And see what trifling things can do sometimes; it seems nothing
      at all, but it’s painful. It occurred to her to ask me, what is my
      name; not my surname, but my first name. I must needs be so unlucky as to
      be called Trifon. Yes, indeed; Trifon Ivanich. Every one in the house
      called me doctor. However, there’s no help for it. I say, ‘Trifon,
      madam.’ She frowned, shook her head, and muttered something in
      French—ah, something unpleasant, of course!—and then she
      laughed—disagreeably too. Well, I spent the whole night with her in
      this way. Before morning I went away, feeling as though I were mad. When I
      went again into her room it was daytime, after morning tea. Good God! I
      could scarcely recognise her; people are laid in their grave looking
      better than that. I swear to you, on my honour, I don’t understand—I
      absolutely don’t understand—now, how I lived through that
      experience. Three days and nights my patient still lingered on. And what
      nights! What things she said to me! And on the last night—only
      imagine to yourself—I was sitting near her, and kept praying to God
      for one thing only: ‘Take her,’ I said, ‘quickly, and me
      with her.’ Suddenly the old mother comes unexpectedly into the room.
      I had already the evening before told her—-the mother—there
      was little hope, and it would be well to send for a priest. When the sick
      girl saw her mother she said: ‘It’s very well you have come;
      look at us, we love one another—we have given each other our word.’
      ‘What does she say, doctor? what does she say?’ I turned
      livid. ‘She is wandering,’ I say; ‘the fever.’
      But she: ‘Hush, hush; you told me something quite different just
      now, and have taken my ring. Why do you pretend? My mother is good—she
      will forgive—she will understand—and I am dying. ... I have no
      need to tell lies; give me your hand.’ I jumped up and ran out of
      the room. The old lady, of course, guessed how it was.
    

      “I will not, however, weary you any longer, and to me too, of
      course, it’s painful to recall all this. My patient passed away the
      next day. God rest her soul!” the doctor added, speaking quickly and
      with a sigh. “Before her death she asked her family to go out and
      leave me alone with her.”
    

      “‘Forgive me,’ she said; ‘I am perhaps to blame
      towards you ... my illness ... but believe me, I have loved no one more
      than you ... do not forget me ... keep my ring.’”
    

      The doctor turned away; I took his hand.
    

      “Ah!” he said, “let us talk of something else, or would
      you care to play preference for a small stake? It is not for people like
      me to give way to exalted emotions. There’s only one thing for me to
      think of; how to keep the children from crying and the wife from scolding.
      Since then, you know, I have had time to enter into lawful wedlock, as
      they say... Oh ... I took a merchant’s daughter—seven thousand
      for her dowry. Her name’s Akulina; it goes well with Trifon. She is
      an ill-tempered woman, I must tell you, but luckily she’s asleep all
      day... Well, shall it be preference?”
    

      We sat down to preference for halfpenny points. Trifon Ivanich won two
      rubles and a half from me, and went home late, well pleased with his
      success.
    











      THE CHRISTMAS TREE AND THE WEDDING
    

      BY FIODOR M. DOSTOYEVSKY
    

The other day I saw
      a wedding... But no! I would rather tell you about a Christmas tree. The
      wedding was superb. I liked it immensely. But the other incident was still
      finer. I don’t know why it is that the sight of the wedding reminded
      me of the Christmas tree. This is the way it happened:
    

      Exactly five years ago, on New Year’s Eve, I was invited to a
      children’s ball by a man high up in the business world, who had his
      connections, his circle of acquaintances, and his intrigues. So it seemed
      as though the children’s ball was merely a pretext for the parents
      to come together and discuss matters of interest to themselves, quite
      innocently and casually.
    

      I was an outsider, and, as I had no special matters to air, I was able to
      spend the evening independently of the others. There was another gentleman
      present who like myself had just stumbled upon this affair of domestic
      bliss. He was the first to attract my attention. His appearance was not
      that of a man of birth or high family. He was tall, rather thin, very
      serious, and well dressed. Apparently he had no heart for the family
      festivities. The instant he went off into a corner by himself the smile
      disappeared from his face, and his thick dark brows knitted into a frown.
      He knew no one except the host and showed every sign of being bored to
      death, though bravely sustaining the role of thorough enjoyment to the
      end. Later I learned that he was a provincial, had come to the capital on
      some important, brain-racking business, had brought a letter of
      recommendation to our host, and our host had taken him under his
      protection, not at all con amore. It was merely out of politeness
      that he had invited him to the children’s ball.
    

      They did not play cards with him, they did not offer him cigars. No one
      entered into conversation with him. Possibly they recognised the bird by
      its feathers from a distance. Thus, my gentleman, not knowing what to do
      with his hands, was compelled to spend the evening stroking his whiskers.
      His whiskers were really fine, but he stroked them so assiduously that one
      got the feeling that the whiskers had come into the world first and
      afterwards the man in order to stroke them.
    

      There was another guest who interested me. But he was of quite a different
      order. He was a personage. They called him Julian Mastakovich. At first
      glance one could tell he was an honoured guest and stood in the same
      relation to the host as the host to the gentleman of the whiskers. The
      host and hostess said no end of amiable things to him, were most
      attentive, wining him, hovering over him, bringing guests up to be
      introduced, but never leading him to any one else. I noticed tears glisten
      in our host’s eyes when Julian Mastakovich remarked that he had
      rarely spent such a pleasant evening. Somehow I began to feel
      uncomfortable in this personage’s presence. So, after amusing myself
      with the children, five of whom, remarkably well-fed young persons, were
      our host’s, I went into a little sitting-room, entirely unoccupied,
      and seated myself at the end that was a conservatory and took up almost
      half the room.
    

      The children were charming. They absolutely refused to resemble their
      elders, notwithstanding the efforts of mothers and governesses. In a jiffy
      they had denuded the Christmas tree down to the very last sweet and had
      already succeeded in breaking half of their playthings before they even
      found out which belonged to whom.
    

      One of them was a particularly handsome little lad, dark-eyed,
      curly-haired, who stubbornly persisted in aiming at me with his wooden
      gun. But the child that attracted the greatest attention was his sister, a
      girl of about eleven, lovely as a Cupid. She was quiet and thoughtful,
      with large, full, dreamy eyes. The children had somehow offended her, and
      she left them and walked into the same room that I had withdrawn into.
      There she seated herself with her doll in a corner.
    

      “Her father is an immensely wealthy business man,” the guests
      informed each other in tones of awe. “Three hundred thousand rubles
      set aside for her dowry already.”
    

      As I turned to look at the group from which I heard this news item
      issuing, my glance met Julian Mastakovich’s. He stood listening to
      the insipid chatter in an attitude of concentrated attention, with his
      hands behind his back and his head inclined to one side.
    

      All the while I was quite lost in admiration of the shrewdness our host
      displayed in the dispensing of the gifts. The little maid of the
      many-rubied dowry received the handsomest doll, and the rest of the gifts
      were graded in value according to the diminishing scale of the parents’
      stations in life. The last child, a tiny chap of ten, thin, red-haired,
      freckled, came into possession of a small book of nature stories without
      illustrations or even head and tail pieces. He was the governess’s
      child. She was a poor widow, and her little boy, clad in a sorry-looking
      little nankeen jacket, looked thoroughly crushed and intimidated. He took
      the book of nature stories and circled slowly about the children’s
      toys. He would have given anything to play with them. But he did not dare
      to. You could tell he already knew his place.
    

      I like to observe children. It is fascinating to watch the individuality
      in them struggling for self-assertion. I could see that the other children’s
      things had tremendous charm for the red-haired boy, especially a toy
      theatre, in which he was so anxious to take a part that he resolved to
      fawn upon the other children. He smiled and began to play with them. His
      one and only apple he handed over to a puffy urchin whose pockets were
      already crammed with sweets, and he even carried another youngster
      pickaback—all simply that he might be allowed to stay with the
      theatre.
    

      But in a few moments an impudent young person fell on him and gave him a
      pummelling. He did not dare even to cry. The governess came and told him
      to leave off interfering with the other children’s games, and he
      crept away to the same room the little girl and I were in. She let him sit
      down beside her, and the two set themselves busily dressing the expensive
      doll.
    

      Almost half an hour passed, and I was nearly dozing off, as I sat there in
      the conservatory half listening to the chatter of the red-haired boy and
      the dowered beauty, when Julian Mastakovich entered suddenly. He had
      slipped out of the drawing-room under cover of a noisy scene among the
      children. From my secluded corner it had not escaped my notice that a few
      moments before he had been eagerly conversing with the rich girl’s
      father, to whom he had only just been introduced.
    

      He stood still for a while reflecting and mumbling to himself, as if
      counting something on his fingers.
    

      “Three hundred—three hundred—eleven—twelve—thirteen—sixteen—in
      five years! Let’s say four per cent—five times twelve—sixty,
      and on these sixty——. Let us assume that in five years it will
      amount to—well, four hundred. Hm—hm! But the shrewd old fox
      isn’t likely to be satisfied with four per cent. He gets eight or
      even ten, perhaps. Let’s suppose five hundred, five hundred
      thousand, at least, that’s sure. Anything above that for pocket
      money—hm—”
    

      He blew his nose and was about to leave the room when he spied the girl
      and stood still. I, behind the plants, escaped his notice. He seemed to me
      to be quivering with excitement. It must have been his calculations that
      upset him so. He rubbed his hands and danced from place to place, and kept
      getting more and more excited. Finally, however, he conquered his emotions
      and came to a standstill. He cast a determined look at the future bride
      and wanted to move toward her, but glanced about first. Then, as if with a
      guilty conscience, he stepped over to the child on tip-toe, smiling, and
      bent down and kissed her head.
    

      His coming was so unexpected that she uttered a shriek of alarm.
    

      “What are you doing here, dear child?” he whispered, looking
      around and pinching her cheek.
    

      “We’re playing.”
    

      “What, with him?” said Julian Mastakovich with a look askance
      at the governess’s child. “You should go into the
      drawing-room, my lad,” he said to him.
    

      The boy remained silent and looked up at the man with wide-open eyes.
      Julian Mastakovich glanced round again cautiously and bent down over the
      girl.
    

      “What have you got, a doll, my dear?”
    

      “Yes, sir.” The child quailed a little, and her brow wrinkled.
    

      “A doll? And do you know, my dear, what dolls are made of?”
    

      “No, sir,” she said weakly, and lowered her head.
    

      “Out of rags, my dear. You, boy, you go back to the drawing-room, to
      the children,” said Julian Mastakovich looking at the boy sternly.
    

      The two children frowned. They caught hold of each other and would not
      part.
    

      “And do you know why they gave you the doll?” asked Julian
      Mastakovich, dropping his voice lower and lower.
    

      “No.”
    

      “Because you were a good, very good little girl the whole week.”
    

      Saying which, Julian Mastakovich was seized with a paroxysm of agitation.
      He looked round and said in a tone faint, almost inaudible with excitement
      and impatience:
    

      “If I come to visit your parents will you love me, my dear?”
    

      He tried to kiss the sweet little creature, but the red-haired boy saw
      that she was on the verge of tears, and he caught her hand and sobbed out
      loud in sympathy. That enraged the man.
    

      “Go away! Go away! Go back to the other room, to your playmates.”
    

      “I don’t want him to. I don’t want him to! You go away!”
      cried the girl. “Let him alone! Let him alone!” She was almost
      weeping.
    

      There was a sound of footsteps in the doorway. Julian Mastakovich started
      and straightened up his respectable body. The red-haired boy was even more
      alarmed. He let go the girl’s hand, sidled along the wall, and
      escaped through the drawing-room into the dining-room.
    

      Not to attract attention, Julian Mastakovich also made for the
      dining-room. He was red as a lobster. The sight of himself in a mirror
      seemed to embarrass him. Presumably he was annoyed at his own ardour and
      impatience. Without due respect to his importance and dignity, his
      calculations had lured and pricked him to the greedy eagerness of a boy,
      who makes straight for his object—though this was not as yet an
      object; it only would be so in five years’ time. I followed the
      worthy man into the dining-room, where I witnessed a remarkable play.
    

      Julian Mastakovich, all flushed with vexation, venom in his look, began to
      threaten the red-haired boy. The red-haired boy retreated farther and
      farther until there was no place left for him to retreat to, and he did
      not know where to turn in his fright.
    

      “Get out of here! What are you doing here? Get out, I say, you
      good-for-nothing! Stealing fruit, are you? Oh, so, stealing fruit! Get
      out, you freckle face, go to your likes!”
    

      The frightened child, as a last desperate resort, crawled quickly under
      the table. His persecutor, completely infuriated, pulled out his large
      linen handkerchief and used it as a lash to drive the boy out of his
      position.
    

      Here I must remark that Julian Mastakovich was a somewhat corpulent man,
      heavy, well-fed, puffy-cheeked, with a paunch and ankles as round as nuts.
      He perspired and puffed and panted. So strong was his dislike (or was it
      jealousy?) of the child that he actually began to carry on like a madman.
    

      I laughed heartily. Julian Mastakovich turned. He was utterly confused and
      for a moment, apparently, quite oblivious of his immense importance. At
      that moment our host appeared in the doorway opposite. The boy crawled out
      from under the table and wiped his knees and elbows. Julian Mastakovich
      hastened to carry his handkerchief, which he had been dangling by the
      corner, to his nose. Our host looked at the three of us rather
      suspiciously. But, like a man who knows the world and can readily adjust
      himself, he seized upon the opportunity to lay hold of his very valuable
      guest and get what he wanted out of him.
    

      “Here’s the boy I was talking to you about,” he said,
      indicating the red-haired child. “I took the liberty of presuming on
      your goodness in his behalf.”
    

      “Oh,” replied Julian Mastakovich, still not quite master of
      himself.
    

      “He’s my governess’s son,” our host continued in a
      beseeching tone. “She’s a poor creature, the widow of an
      honest official. That’s why, if it were possible for you—”
    

      “Impossible, impossible!” Julian Mastakovich cried hastily.
      “You must excuse me, Philip Alexeyevich, I really cannot. I’ve
      made inquiries. There are no vacancies, and there is a waiting list of ten
      who have a greater right—I’m sorry.”
    

      “Too bad,” said our host. “He’s a quiet,
      unobtrusive child.”
    

      “A very naughty little rascal, I should say,” said Julian
      Mastakovich, wryly. “Go away, boy. Why are you here still? Be off
      with you to the other children.”
    

      Unable to control himself, he gave me a sidelong glance. Nor could I
      control myself. I laughed straight in his face. He turned away and asked
      our host, in tones quite audible to me, who that odd young fellow was.
      They whispered to each other and left the room, disregarding me.
    

      I shook with laughter. Then I, too, went to the drawing-room. There the
      great man, already surrounded by the fathers and mothers and the host and
      the hostess, had begun to talk eagerly with a lady to whom he had just
      been introduced. The lady held the rich little girl’s hand. Julian
      Mastakovich went into fulsome praise of her. He waxed ecstatic over the
      dear child’s beauty, her talents, her grace, her excellent breeding,
      plainly laying himself out to flatter the mother, who listened scarcely
      able to restrain tears of joy, while the father showed his delight by a
      gratified smile.
    

      The joy was contagious. Everybody shared in it. Even the children were
      obliged to stop playing so as not to disturb the conversation. The
      atmosphere was surcharged with awe. I heard the mother of the important
      little girl, touched to her profoundest depths, ask Julian Mastakovich in
      the choicest language of courtesy, whether he would honour them by coming
      to see them. I heard Julian Mastakovich accept the invitation with
      unfeigned enthusiasm. Then the guests scattered decorously to different
      parts of the room, and I heard them, with veneration in their tones, extol
      the business man, the business man’s wife, the business man’s
      daughter, and, especially, Julian Mastakovich.
    

      “Is he married?” I asked out loud of an acquaintance of mine
      standing beside Julian Mastakovich.
    

      Julian Mastakovich gave me a venomous look.
    

      “No,” answered my acquaintance, profoundly shocked by my—intentional—indiscretion.
    








      Not long ago I passed the Church of——. I was struck by the
      concourse of people gathered there to witness a wedding. It was a dreary
      day. A drizzling rain was beginning to come down. I made my way through
      the throng into the church. The bridegroom was a round, well-fed,
      pot-bellied little man, very much dressed up. He ran and fussed about and
      gave orders and arranged things. Finally word was passed that the bride
      was coming. I pushed through the crowd, and I beheld a marvellous beauty
      whose first spring was scarcely commencing. But the beauty was pale and
      sad. She looked distracted. It seemed to me even that her eyes were red
      from recent weeping. The classic severity of every line of her face
      imparted a peculiar significance and solemnity to her beauty. But through
      that severity and solemnity, through the sadness, shone the innocence of a
      child. There was something inexpressibly naÃ¯ve, unsettled and young in her
      features, which, without words, seemed to plead for mercy.
    

      They said she was just sixteen years old. I looked at the bridegroom
      carefully. Suddenly I recognised Julian Mastakovich, whom I had not seen
      again in all those five years. Then I looked at the bride again.—Good
      God! I made my way, as quickly as I could, out of the church. I heard
      gossiping in the crowd about the bride’s wealth—about her
      dowry of five hundred thousand rubles—so and so much for pocket
      money.
    

      “Then his calculations were correct,” I thought, as I pressed
      out into the street.
    











      GOD SEES THE TRUTH, BUT WAITS
    

      BY LEO N. TOLSTOY
    

In the town of
      Vladimir lived a young merchant named Ivan Dmitrich Aksionov. He had two
      shops and a house of his own.
    

      Aksionov was a handsome, fair-haired, curly-headed fellow, full of fun,
      and very fond of singing. When quite a young man he had been given to
      drink, and was riotous when he had had too much; but after he married he
      gave up drinking, except now and then.
    

      One summer Aksionov was going to the Nizhny Fair, and as he bade good-bye
      to his family, his wife said to him, “Ivan Dmitrich, do not start
      to-day; I have had a bad dream about you.”
    

      Aksionov laughed, and said, “You are afraid that when I get to the
      fair I shall go on a spree.”
    

      His wife replied: “I do not know what I am afraid of; all I know is
      that I had a bad dream. I dreamt you returned from the town, and when you
      took off your cap I saw that your hair was quite grey.”
    

      Aksionov laughed. “That’s a lucky sign,” said he.
      “See if I don’t sell out all my goods, and bring you some
      presents from the fair.”
    

      So he said good-bye to his family, and drove away.
    

      When he had travelled half-way, he met a merchant whom he knew, and they
      put up at the same inn for the night. They had some tea together, and then
      went to bed in adjoining rooms.
    

      It was not Aksionov’s habit to sleep late, and, wishing to travel
      while it was still cool, he aroused his driver before dawn, and told him
      to put in the horses.
    

      Then he made his way across to the landlord of the inn (who lived in a
      cottage at the back), paid his bill, and continued his journey.
    

      When he had gone about twenty-five miles, he stopped for the horses to be
      fed. Aksionov rested awhile in the passage of the inn, then he stepped out
      into the porch, and, ordering a samovar to be heated, got out his guitar
      and began to play.
    

      Suddenly a troika drove up with tinkling bells and an official alighted,
      followed by two soldiers. He came to Aksionov and began to question him,
      asking him who he was and whence he came. Aksionov answered him fully, and
      said, “Won’t you have some tea with me?” But the
      official went on cross-questioning him and asking him. “Where did
      you spend last night? Were you alone, or with a fellow-merchant? Did you
      see the other merchant this morning? Why did you leave the inn before
      dawn?”
    

      Aksionov wondered why he was asked all these questions, but he described
      all that had happened, and then added, “Why do you cross-question me
      as if I were a thief or a robber? I am travelling on business of my own,
      and there is no need to question me.”
    

      Then the official, calling the soldiers, said, “I am the
      police-officer of this district, and I question you because the merchant
      with whom you spent last night has been found with his throat cut. We must
      search your things.”
    

      They entered the house. The soldiers and the police-officer unstrapped
      Aksionov’s luggage and searched it. Suddenly the officer drew a
      knife out of a bag, crying, “Whose knife is this?”
    

      Aksionov looked, and seeing a blood-stained knife taken from his bag, he
      was frightened.
    

      “How is it there is blood on this knife?”
    

      Aksionov tried to answer, but could hardly utter a word, and only
      stammered: “I—don’t know—not mine.” Then the
      police-officer said: “This morning the merchant was found in bed
      with his throat cut. You are the only person who could have done it. The
      house was locked from inside, and no one else was there. Here is this
      blood-stained knife in your bag and your face and manner betray you! Tell
      me how you killed him, and how much money you stole?”
    

      Aksionov swore he had not done it; that he had not seen the merchant after
      they had had tea together; that he had no money except eight thousand
      rubles of his own, and that the knife was not his. But his voice was
      broken, his face pale, and he trembled with fear as though he went guilty.
    

      The police-officer ordered the soldiers to bind Aksionov and to put him in
      the cart. As they tied his feet together and flung him into the cart,
      Aksionov crossed himself and wept. His money and goods were taken from
      him, and he was sent to the nearest town and imprisoned there. Enquiries
      as to his character were made in Vladimir. The merchants and other
      inhabitants of that town said that in former days he used to drink and
      waste his time, but that he was a good man. Then the trial came on: he was
      charged with murdering a merchant from Ryazan, and robbing him of twenty
      thousand rubles.
    

      His wife was in despair, and did not know what to believe. Her children
      were all quite small; one was a baby at her breast. Taking them all with
      her, she went to the town where her husband was in jail. At first she was
      not allowed to see him; but after much begging, she obtained permission
      from the officials, and was taken to him. When she saw her husband in
      prison-dress and in chains, shut up with thieves and criminals, she fell
      down, and did not come to her senses for a long time. Then she drew her
      children to her, and sat down near him. She told him of things at home,
      and asked about what had happened to him. He told her all, and she asked,
      “What can we do now?”
    

      “We must petition the Czar not to let an innocent man perish.”
    

      His wife told him that she had sent a petition to the Czar, but it had not
      been accepted.
    

      Aksionov did not reply, but only looked downcast.
    

      Then his wife said, “It was not for nothing I dreamt your hair had
      turned grey. You remember? You should not have started that day.”
      And passing her fingers through his hair, she said: “Vanya dearest,
      tell your wife the truth; was it not you who did it?”
    

      “So you, too, suspect me!” said Aksionov, and, hiding his face
      in his hands, he began to weep. Then a soldier came to say that the wife
      and children must go away; and Aksionov said good-bye to his family for
      the last time.
    

      When they were gone, Aksionov recalled what had been said, and when he
      remembered that his wife also had suspected him, he said to himself,
      “It seems that only God can know the truth; it is to Him alone we
      must appeal, and from Him alone expect mercy.”
    

      And Aksionov wrote no more petitions; gave up all hope, and only prayed to
      God.
    

      Aksionov was condemned to be flogged and sent to the mines. So he was
      flogged with a knot, and when the wounds made by the knot were healed, he
      was driven to Siberia with other convicts.
    

      For twenty-six years Aksionov lived as a convict in Siberia. His hair
      turned white as snow, and his beard grew long, thin, and grey. All his
      mirth went; he stooped; he walked slowly, spoke little, and never laughed,
      but he often prayed.
    

      In prison Aksionov learnt to make boots, and earned a little money, with
      which he bought The Lives of the Saints. He read this book when
      there was light enough in the prison; and on Sundays in the prison-church
      he read the lessons and sang in the choir; for his voice was still good.
    

      The prison authorities liked Aksionov for his meekness, and his
      fellow-prisoners respected him: they called him “Grandfather,”
      and “The Saint.” When they wanted to petition the prison
      authorities about anything, they always made Aksionov their spokesman, and
      when there were quarrels among the prisoners they came to him to put
      things right, and to judge the matter.
    

      No news reached Aksionov from his home, and he did not even know if his
      wife and children were still alive.
    

      One day a fresh gang of convicts came to the prison. In the evening the
      old prisoners collected round the new ones and asked them what towns or
      villages they came from, and what they were sentenced for. Among the rest
      Aksionov sat down near the newcomers, and listened with downcast air to
      what was said.
    

      One of the new convicts, a tall, strong man of sixty, with a
      closely-cropped grey beard, was telling the others what he had been
      arrested for.
    

      “Well, friends,” he said, “I only took a horse that was
      tied to a sledge, and I was arrested and accused of stealing. I said I had
      only taken it to get home quicker, and had then let it go; besides, the
      driver was a personal friend of mine. So I said, ‘It’s all
      right.’ 'No,’ said they, ‘you stole it.’ But how
      or where I stole it they could not say. I once really did something wrong,
      and ought by rights to have come here long ago, but that time I was not
      found out. Now I have been sent here for nothing at all... Eh, but it’s
      lies I’m telling you; I’ve been to Siberia before, but I did
      not stay long.”
    

      “Where are you from?” asked some one.
    

      “From Vladimir. My family are of that town. My name is Makar, and
      they also call me Semyonich.”
    

      Aksionov raised his head and said: “Tell me, Semyonich, do you know
      anything of the merchants Aksionov of Vladimir? Are they still alive?”
    

      “Know them? Of course I do. The Aksionovs are rich, though their
      father is in Siberia: a sinner like ourselves, it seems! As for you, Gran’dad,
      how did you come here?”
    

      Aksionov did not like to speak of his misfortune. He only sighed, and
      said, “For my sins I have been in prison these twenty-six years.”
    

      “What sins?” asked Makar Semyonich.
    

      But Aksionov only said, “Well, well—I must have deserved it!”
      He would have said no more, but his companions told the newcomers how
      Aksionov came to be in Siberia; how some one had killed a merchant, and
      had put the knife among Aksionov’s things, and Aksionov had been
      unjustly condemned.
    

      When Makar Semyonich heard this, he looked at Aksionov, slapped his own
      knee, and exclaimed, “Well, this is wonderful! Really wonderful! But
      how old you’ve grown, Gran’dad!”
    

      The others asked him why he was so surprised, and where he had seen
      Aksionov before; but Makar Semyonich did not reply. He only said: “It’s
      wonderful that we should meet here, lads!”
    

      These words made Aksionov wonder whether this man knew who had killed the
      merchant; so he said, “Perhaps, Semyonich, you have heard of that
      affair, or maybe you’ve seen me before?”
    

      “How could I help hearing? The world’s full of rumours. But it’s
      a long time ago, and I’ve forgotten what I heard.”
    

      “Perhaps you heard who killed the merchant?” asked Aksionov.
    

      Makar Semyonich laughed, and replied: “It must have been him in
      whose bag the knife was found! If some one else hid the knife there,
      ‘He’s not a thief till he’s caught,’ as the saying
      is. How could any one put a knife into your bag while it was under your
      head? It would surely have woke you up.”
    

      When Aksionov heard these words, he felt sure this was the man who had
      killed the merchant. He rose and went away. All that night Aksionov lay
      awake. He felt terribly unhappy, and all sorts of images rose in his mind.
      There was the image of his wife as she was when he parted from her to go
      to the fair. He saw her as if she were present; her face and her eyes rose
      before him; he heard her speak and laugh. Then he saw his children, quite
      little, as they were at that time: one with a little cloak on, another at
      his mother’s breast. And then he remembered himself as he used to
      be-young and merry. He remembered how he sat playing the guitar in the
      porch of the inn where he was arrested, and how free from care he had
      been. He saw, in his mind, the place where he was flogged, the
      executioner, and the people standing around; the chains, the convicts, all
      the twenty-six years of his prison life, and his premature old age. The
      thought of it all made him so wretched that he was ready to kill himself.
    

      “And it’s all that villain’s doing!” thought
      Aksionov. And his anger was so great against Makar Semyonich that he
      longed for vengeance, even if he himself should perish for it. He kept
      repeating prayers all night, but could get no peace. During the day he did
      not go near Makar Semyonich, nor even look at him.
    

      A fortnight passed in this way. Aksionov could not sleep at night, and was
      so miserable that he did not know what to do.
    

      One night as he was walking about the prison he noticed some earth that
      came rolling out from under one of the shelves on which the prisoners
      slept. He stopped to see what it was. Suddenly Makar Semyonich crept out
      from under the shelf, and looked up at Aksionov with frightened face.
      Aksionov tried to pass without looking at him, but Makar seized his hand
      and told him that he had dug a hole under the wall, getting rid of the
      earth by putting it into his high-boots, and emptying it out every day on
      the road when the prisoners were driven to their work.
    

      “Just you keep quiet, old man, and you shall get out too. If you
      blab, they’ll flog the life out of me, but I will kill you first.”
    

      Aksionov trembled with anger as he looked at his enemy. He drew his hand
      away, saying, “I have no wish to escape, and you have no need to
      kill me; you killed me long ago! As to telling of you—I may do so or
      not, as God shall direct.”
    

      Next day, when the convicts were led out to work, the convoy soldiers
      noticed that one or other of the prisoners emptied some earth out of his
      boots. The prison was searched and the tunnel found. The Governor came and
      questioned all the prisoners to find out who had dug the hole. They all
      denied any knowledge of it. Those who knew would not betray Makar
      Semyonich, knowing he would be flogged almost to death. At last the
      Governor turned to Aksionov whom he knew to be a just man, and said:
    

      “You are a truthful old man; tell me, before God, who dug the hole?”
    

      Makar Semyonich stood as if he were quite unconcerned, looking at the
      Governor and not so much as glancing at Aksionov. Aksionov’s lips
      and hands trembled, and for a long time he could not utter a word. He
      thought, “Why should I screen him who ruined my life? Let him pay
      for what I have suffered. But if I tell, they will probably flog the life
      out of him, and maybe I suspect him wrongly. And, after all, what good
      would it be to me?”
    

      “Well, old man,” repeated the Governor, “tell me the
      truth: who has been digging under the wall?”
    

      Aksionov glanced at Makar Semyonich, and said, “I cannot say, your
      honour. It is not God’s will that I should tell! Do what you like
      with me; I am in your hands.”
    

      However much the Governor tried, Aksionov would say no more, and so the
      matter had to be left.
    

      That night, when Aksionov was lying on his bed and just beginning to doze,
      some one came quietly and sat down on his bed. He peered through the
      darkness and recognised Makar.
    

      “What more do you want of me?” asked Aksionov. “Why have
      you come here?”
    

      Makar Semyonich was silent. So Aksionov sat up and said, “What do
      you want? Go away, or I will call the guard!”
    

      Makar Semyonich bent close over Aksionov, and whispered, “Ivan
      Dmitrich, forgive me!”
    

      “What for?” asked Aksionov.
    

      “It was I who killed the merchant and hid the knife among your
      things. I meant to kill you too, but I heard a noise outside, so I hid the
      knife in your bag and escaped out of the window.”
    

      Aksionov was silent, and did not know what to say. Makar Semyonich slid
      off the bed-shelf and knelt upon the ground. “Ivan Dmitrich,”
      said he, “forgive me! For the love of God, forgive me! I will
      confess that it was I who killed the merchant, and you will be released
      and can go to your home.”
    

      “It is easy for you to talk,” said Aksionov, “but I have
      suffered for you these twenty-six years. Where could I go to now?... My
      wife is dead, and my children have forgotten me. I have nowhere to go...”
    

      Makar Semyonich did not rise, but beat his head on the floor. “Ivan
      Dmitrich, forgive me!” he cried. “When they flogged me with
      the knot it was not so hard to bear as it is to see you now ... yet you
      had pity on me, and did not tell. For Christ’s sake forgive me,
      wretch that I am!” And he began to sob.
    

      When Aksionov heard him sobbing he, too, began to weep. “God will
      forgive you!” said he. “Maybe I am a hundred times worse than
      you.” And at these words his heart grew light, and the longing for
      home left him. He no longer had any desire to leave the prison, but only
      hoped for his last hour to come.
    

      In spite of what Aksionov had said, Makar Semyonich confessed his guilt.
      But when the order for his release came, Aksionov was already dead.
    











      HOW A MUZHIK FED TWO OFFICIALS
    

      BY M.Y. SALTYKOV [N.Shchedrin]
    

      Once upon a time there were two Officials. They were both empty-headed,
      and so they found themselves one day suddenly transported to an
      uninhabited isle, as if on a magic carpet.
    

      They had passed their whole life in a Government Department, where records
      were kept; had been born there, bred there, grown old there, and
      consequently hadn’t the least understanding for anything outside of
      the Department; and the only words they knew were: “With assurances
      of the highest esteem, I am your humble servant.”
    

      But the Department was abolished, and as the services of the two Officials
      were no longer needed, they were given their freedom. So the retired
      Officials migrated to Podyacheskaya Street in St. Petersburg. Each had his
      own home, his own cook and his pension.
    

      Waking up on the uninhabited isle, they found themselves lying under the
      same cover. At first, of course, they couldn’t understand what had
      happened to them, and they spoke as if nothing extraordinary had taken
      place.
    

      “What a peculiar dream I had last night, your Excellency,”
      said the one Official. “It seemed to me as if I were on an
      uninhabited isle.”
    

      Scarcely had he uttered the words, when he jumped to his feet. The other
      Official also jumped up.
    

      “Good Lord, what does this mean! Where are we?” they cried out
      in astonishment.
    

      They felt each other to make sure that they were no longer dreaming, and
      finally convinced themselves of the sad reality.
    

      Before them stretched the ocean, and behind them was a little spot of
      earth, beyond which the ocean stretched again. They began to cry—the
      first time since their Department had been shut down.
    

      They looked at each other, and each noticed that the other was clad in
      nothing but his night shirt with his order hanging about his neck.
    

      “We really should be having our coffee now,” observed the one
      Official. Then he bethought himself again of the strange situation he was
      in and a second time fell to weeping.
    

      “What are we going to do now?” he sobbed. “Even
      supposing we were to draw up a report, what good would that do?”
    

      “You know what, your Excellency,” replied the other Official,
      “you go to the east and I will go to the west. Toward evening we
      will come back here again and, perhaps, we shall have found something.”
    

      They started to ascertain which was the east and which was the west. They
      recalled that the head of their Department had once said to them, “If
      you want to know where the east is, then turn your face to the north, and
      the east will be on your right.” But when they tried to find out
      which was the north, they turned to the right and to the left and looked
      around on all sides. Having spent their whole life in the Department of
      Records, their efforts were all in vain.
    

      “To my mind, your Excellency, the best thing to do would be for you
      to go to the right and me to go to the left,” said one Official, who
      had served not only in the Department of Records, but had also been
      teacher of handwriting in the School for Reserves, and so was a little bit
      cleverer.
    

      So said, so done. The one Official went to the right. He came upon trees,
      bearing all sorts of fruits. Gladly would he have plucked an apple, but
      they all hung so high that he would have been obliged to climb up. He
      tried to climb up in vain. All he succeeded in doing was tearing his night
      shirt. Then he struck upon a brook. It was swarming with fish.
    

      “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if we had all this fish in
      Podyacheskaya Street!” he thought, and his mouth watered. Then he
      entered woods and found partridges, grouse and hares.
    

      “Good Lord, what an abundance of food!” he cried. His hunger
      was going up tremendously.
    

      But he had to return to the appointed spot with empty hands. He found the
      other Official waiting for him.
    

      “Well, Your Excellency, how went it? Did you find anything?”
    

      “Nothing but an old number of the Moscow Gazette, not another
      thing.”
    

      The Officials lay down to sleep again, but their empty stomachs gave them
      no rest They were partly robbed of their sleep by the thought of who was
      now enjoying their pension, and partly by the recollection of the fruit,
      fishes, partridges, grouse and hares that they had seen during the day.
    

      “The human pabulum in its original form flies, swims and grows on
      trees. Who would have thought it your Excellency?” said the one
      Official.
    

      “To be sure,” rejoined the other Official. “I, too, must
      admit that I had imagined that our breakfast rolls, came into the world
      just as they appear on the table.”
    

      “From which it is to be deduced that if we want to eat a pheasant,
      we must catch it first, kill it, pull its feathers and roast it. But how’s
      that to be done?”
    

      “Yes, how’s that to be done?” repeated the other
      Official.
    

      They turned silent and tried again to fall asleep, but their hunger scared
      sleep away. Before their eyes swarmed flocks of pheasants and ducks, herds
      of porklings, and they were all so juicy, done so tenderly and garnished
      so deliciously with olives, capers and pickles.
    

      “I believe I could devour my own boots now,” said the one
      Official.
    

      “Gloves, are not bad either, especially if they have been born quite
      mellow,” said the other Official.
    

      The two Officials stared at each other fixedly. In their glances gleamed
      an evil-boding fire, their teeth chattered and a dull groaning issued from
      their breasts. Slowly they crept upon each other and suddenly they burst
      into a fearful frenzy. There was a yelling and groaning, the rags flew
      about, and the Official who had been teacher of handwriting bit off his
      colleague’s order and swallowed it. However, the sight of blood
      brought them both back to their senses.
    

      “God help us!” they cried at the same time. “We
      certainly don’t mean to eat each other up. How could we have come to
      such a pass as this? What evil genius is making sport of us?”
    

      “We must, by all means, entertain each other to pass the time away,
      otherwise there will be murder and death,” said the one Official.
    

      “You begin,” said the other.
    

      “Can you explain why it is that the sun first rises and then sets?
      Why isn’t it the reverse?”
    

      “Aren’t you a funny man, your Excellency? You get up first,
      then you go to your office and work there, and at night you lie down to
      sleep.”
    

      “But why can’t one assume the opposite, that is, that one goes
      to bed, sees all sorts of dream figures, and then gets up?”
    

      “Well, yes, certainly. But when I was still an Official, I always
      thought this way: ‘Now it is dawn, then it will be day, then will
      come supper, and finally will come the time to go to bed.’”
    

      The word “supper” recalled that incident in the day’s
      doings, and the thought of it made both Officials melancholy, so that the
      conversation came to a halt.
    

      “A doctor once told me that human beings can sustain themselves for
      a long time on their own juices,” the one Official began again.
    

      “What does that mean?”
    

      “It is quite simple. You see, one’s own juices generate other
      juices, and these in their turn still other juices, and so it goes on
      until finally all the juices are consumed.”
    

      “And then what happens?”
    

      “Then food has to be taken into the system again.”
    

      “The devil!”
    

      No matter what topic the Officials chose, the conversation invariably
      reverted to the subject of eating; which only increased their appetite
      more and more. So they decided to give up talking altogether, and,
      recollecting the Moscow Gazette that the one of them had found,
      they picked it up and began to read eagerly.
    

      BANQUET GIVEN BY THE MAYOR
    

"The table was set
      for one hundred persons. The magnificence of it exceeded all expectations.
      The remotest provinces were represented at this feast of the gods by the
      costliest gifts. The golden sturgeon from Sheksna and the silver pheasant
      from the Caucasian woods held a rendezvous with strawberries so seldom to
      be had in our latitude in winter...”
    

      “The devil! For God’s sake, stop reading, your Excellency.
      Couldn’t you find something else to read about?” cried the
      other Official in sheer desperation. He snatched the paper from his
      colleague’s hands, and started to read something else.
    

      “Our correspondent in Tula informs us that yesterday a sturgeon was
      found in the Upa (an event which even the oldest inhabitants cannot
      recall, and all the more remarkable since they recognised the former
      police captain in this sturgeon). This was made the occasion for giving a
      banquet in the club. The prime cause of the banquet was served in a large
      wooden platter garnished with vinegar pickles. A bunch of parsley stuck
      out of its mouth. Doctor P—— who acted as toast-master saw to
      it that everybody present got a piece of the sturgeon. The sauces to go
      with it were unusually varied and delicate—”
    

      “Permit me, your Excellency, it seems to me you are not so careful
      either in the selection of reading matter,” interrupted the first
      Official, who secured the Gazette again and started to read:
    

      “One of the oldest inhabitants of Viatka has discovered a new and
      highly original recipe for fish soup; A live codfish (lota vulgaris)
      is taken and beaten with a rod until its liver swells up with anger...”
    

      The Officials’ heads drooped. Whatever their eyes fell upon had
      something to do with eating. Even their own thoughts were fatal. No matter
      how much they tried to keep their minds off beefsteak and the like, it was
      all in vain; their fancy returned invariably, with irresistible force,
      back to that for which they were so painfully yearning.
    

      Suddenly an inspiration came to the Official who had once taught
      handwriting.
    

      “I have it!” he cried delightedly. “What do you say to
      this, your Excellency? What do you say to our finding a muzhik?”
    

      “A muzhik, your Excellency? What sort of a muzhik?”
    

      “Why a plain ordinary muzhik. A muzhik like all other muzhiks. He
      would get the breakfast rolls for us right away, and he could also catch
      partridges and fish for us.”
    

      “Hm, a muzhik. But where are we to fetch one from, if there is no
      muzhik here?”
    

      “Why shouldn’t there be a muzhik here? There are muzhiks
      everywhere. All one has to do is hunt for them. There certainly must be a
      muzhik hiding here somewhere so as to get out of working.”
    

      This thought so cheered the Officials that they instantly jumped up to go
      in search of a muzhik.
    

      For a long while they wandered about on the island without the desired
      result, until finally a concentrated smell of black bread and old sheep
      skin assailed their nostrils and guided them in the right direction. There
      under a tree was a colossal muzhik lying fast asleep with his hands under
      his head. It was clear that to escape his duty to work he had impudently
      withdrawn to this island. The indignation of the Officials knew no bounds.
    

      “What, lying asleep here you lazy-bones you!” they raged at
      him, “It is nothing to you that there are two Officials here who are
      fairly perishing of hunger. Up, forward, march, work.”
    

      The Muzhik rose and looked at the two severe gentlemen standing in front
      of him. His first thought was to make his escape, but the Officials held
      him fast.
    

      He had to submit to his fate. He had to work.
    

      First he climbed up on a tree and plucked several dozen of the finest
      apples for the Officials. He kept a rotten one for himself. Then he turned
      up the earth and dug out some potatoes. Next he started a fire with two
      bits of wood that he rubbed against each other. Out of his own hair he
      made a snare and caught partridges. Over the fire, by this time burning
      brightly, he cooked so many kinds of food that the question arose in the
      Officials’ minds whether they shouldn’t give some to this
      idler.
    

      Beholding the efforts of the Muzhik, they rejoiced in their hearts. They
      had already forgotten how the day before they had nearly been perishing of
      hunger, and all they thought of now was: “What a good thing it is to
      be an Official. Nothing bad can ever happen to an Official.”
    

      “Are you satisfied, gentlemen?” the lazy Muzhik asked.
    

      “Yes, we appreciate your industry,” replied the Officials.
    

      “Then you will permit me to rest a little?”
    

      “Go take a little rest, but first make a good strong cord.”
    

      The Muzhik gathered wild hemp stalks, laid them in water, beat them and
      broke them, and toward evening a good stout cord was ready. The Officials
      took the cord and bound the Muzhik to a tree, so that he should not run
      away. Then they laid themselves to sleep.
    

      Thus day after day passed, and the Muzhik became so skilful that he could
      actually cook soup for the Officials in his bare hands. The Officials had
      become round and well-fed and happy. It rejoiced them that here they needn’t
      spend any money and that in the meanwhile their pensions were accumulating
      in St. Petersburg.
    

      “What is your opinion, your Excellency,” one said to the other
      after breakfast one day, “is the Story of the Tower of Babel true?
      Don’t you think it is simply an allegory?”
    

      “By no means, your Excellency, I think it was something that really
      happened. What other explanation is there for the existence of so many
      different languages on earth?”
    

      “Then the Flood must really have taken place, too?”
    

      “Certainly, else; how would you explain the existence of
      Antediluvian animals? Besides, the Moscow Gazette says——”
    

      They made search for the old number of the Moscow Gazette, seated
      themselves in the shade, and read the whole sheet from beginning to end.
      They read of festivities in Moscow, Tula, Penza and Riazan, and strangely
      enough felt no discomfort at the description of the delicacies served.
    

      There is no saying how long this life might have lasted. Finally, however,
      it began to bore the Officials. They often thought of their cooks in St.
      Petersburg, and even shed a few tears in secret.
    

      “I wonder how it looks in Podyacheskaya Street now, your Excellency,”
      one of them said to the other.
    

      “Oh, don’t remind me of it, your Excellency. I am pining away
      with homesickness.”
    

      “It is very nice here. There is really no fault to be found with
      this place, but the lamb longs for its mother sheep. And it is a pity,
      too, for the beautiful uniforms.”
    

      “Yes, indeed, a uniform of the fourth class is no joke. The gold
      embroidery alone is enough to make one dizzy.”
    

      Now they began to importune the Muzhik to find some way of getting them
      back to Podyacheskaya Street, and strange to say, the Muzhik even knew
      where Podyacheskaya Street was. He had once drunk beer and mead there, and
      as the saying goes, everything had run down his beard, alas, but nothing
      into his mouth. The Officials rejoiced and said: “We are Officials
      from Podyacheskaya Street.”
    

      “And I am one of those men—do you remember?—who sit on a
      scaffolding hung by ropes from the roofs and paint the outside walls. I am
      one of those who crawl about on the roofs like flies. That is what I am,”
      replied the Muzhik.
    

      The Muzhik now pondered long and heavily on how to give great pleasure to
      his Officials, who had been so gracious to him, the lazy-bones, and had
      not scorned his work. And he actually succeeded in constructing a ship. It
      was not really a ship, but still it was a vessel, that would carry them
      across the ocean close to Podyacheskaya Street.
    

      “Now, take care, you dog, that you don’t drown us,” said
      the Officials, when they saw the raft rising and falling on the waves.
    

      “Don’t be afraid. We muzhiks are used to this,” said the
      Muzhik, making all the preparations for the journey. He gathered swan’s-down
      and made a couch for his two Officials, then he crossed himself and rowed
      off from shore.
    

      How frightened the Officials were on the way, how seasick they were during
      the storms, how they scolded the coarse Muzhik for his idleness, can
      neither be told nor described. The Muzhik, however, just kept rowing on
      and fed his Officials on herring. At last, they caught sight of dear old
      Mother Neva. Soon they were in the glorious Catherine Canal, and then, oh
      joy! they struck the grand Podyacheskaya Street. When the cooks saw their
      Officials so well-fed, round and so happy, they rejoiced immensely. The
      Officials drank coffee and rolls, then put on their uniforms and drove to
      the Pension Bureau. How much money they collected there is another thing
      that can neither be told nor described. Nor was the Muzhik forgotten. The
      Officials sent a glass of whiskey out to him and five kopeks. Now, Muzhik,
      rejoice.
    











      THE SHADES, A PHANTASY
    

      BY VLADIMIR G. KORLENKO
    

      I
    

A month and two
      days had elapsed since the judges, amid the loud acclaim of the Athenian
      people, had pronounced the death sentence against the philosopher Socrates
      because he had sought to destroy faith in the gods. What the gadfly is to
      the horse Socrates was to Athens. The gadfly stings the horse in order to
      prevent it from dozing off and to keep it moving briskly on its course.
      The philosopher said to the people of Athens:
    

      “I am your gadfly. My sting pricks your conscience and arouses you
      when you are caught napping. Sleep not, sleep not, people of Athens; awake
      and seek the truth!”
    

      The people arose in their exasperation and cruelly demanded to be rid of
      their gadfly.
    

      “Perchance both of his accusers, Meletus and Anytus, are wrong,”
      said the citizens, on leaving the court after sentence had been
      pronounced.
    

      “But after all whither do his doctrines tend? What would he do? He
      has wrought confusion, he overthrows beliefs that have existed since the
      beginning, he speaks of new virtues which must be recognised and sought
      for, he speaks of a Divinity hitherto unknown to us. The blasphemer, he
      deems himself wiser than the gods! No, ‘twere better we remain true
      to the old gods whom we know. They may not always be just, sometimes they
      may flare up in unjust wrath, and they may also be seized with a wanton
      lust for the wives of mortals; but did not our ancestors live with them in
      the peace of their souls, did not our forefathers accomplish their heroic
      deeds with the help of these very gods? And now the faces of the Olympians
      have paled and the old virtue is out of joint. What does it all lead to?
      Should not an end be put to this impious wisdom once for all?”
    

      Thus the citizens of Athens spoke to one another as they left the place,
      and the blue twilight was falling. They had determined to kill the
      restless gadfly in the hope that the countenances of the gods would shine
      again. And yet—before their souls arose the mild figure of the
      singular philosopher. There were some citizens who recalled how
      courageously he had shared their troubles and dangers at PotidÃ¦a; how he
      alone had prevented them from committing the sin of unjustly executing the
      generals after the victory over the ArginusÃ¦e; how he alone had dared to
      raise his voice against the tyrants who had had fifteen hundred people put
      to death, speaking to the people on the market-place concerning shepherds
      and their sheep.
    

      “Is not he a good shepherd,” he asked, “who guards his
      flock and watches over its increase? Or is it the work of the good
      shepherd to reduce the number of his sheep and disperse them, and of the
      good ruler to do the same with his people? Men of Athens, let us
      investigate this question!”
    

      And at this question of the solitary, undefended philosopher, the faces of
      the tyrants paled, while the eyes of the youths kindled with the fire of
      just wrath and indignation.
    

      Thus, when on dispersing after the sentence the Athenians recalled all
      these things of Socrates, their hearts were oppressed with heavy doubt.
    

      “Have we not done a cruel wrong to the son of Sophroniscus?”
    

      But then the good Athenians looked upon the harbour and the sea, and in
      the red glow of the dying day they saw the purple sails of the
      sharp-keeled ship, sent to the Delian festival, shimmering in the distance
      on the blue Pontus. The ship would not return until the expiration of a
      month, and the Athenians recollected that during this time no blood might
      be shed in Athens, whether the blood of the innocent or the guilty. A
      month, moreover, has many days and still more hours. Supposing the son of
      Sophroniscus had been unjustly condemned, who would hinder his escaping
      from the prison, especially since he had numerous friends to help him? Was
      it so difficult for the rich Plato, for Ãschines and others to bribe the
      guards? Then the restless gadfly would flee from Athens to the barbarians
      in Thessaly, or to the Peloponnesus, or, still farther, to Egypt; Athens
      would no longer hear his blasphemous speeches; his death would not weigh
      upon the conscience of the worthy citizens, and so everything would end
      for the best of all.
    

      Thus said many to themselves that evening, while aloud they praised the
      wisdom of the demos and the heliasts. In secret, however, they cherished
      the hope that the restless philosopher would leave Athens, fly from the
      hemlock to the barbarians, and so free the Athenians of his troublesome
      presence and of the pangs of consciences that smote them for inflicting
      death upon an innocent man.
    

      Two and thirty times since that evening had the sun risen from the ocean
      and dipped down into it again. The ship had returned from Delos and lay in
      the harbour with sadly drooping sails, as if ashamed of its native city.
      The moon did not shine in the heavens, the sea heaved under a heavy fog,
      and on the hills lights peered through the obscurity like the eyes of men
      gripped by a sense of guilt.
    

      The stubborn Socrates did not spare the conscience of the good Athenians.
    

      “We part! You go home and I go to death,” he said to the
      judges after the sentence had been pronounced. “I know not, my
      friends, which of us chooses the better lot!”
    

      As the time had approached for the return of the ship, many of the
      citizens had begun to feel uneasy. Must that obstinate fellow really die?
      And they began to appeal to the consciences of Ãschines, PhÃ¦do, and other
      pupils of Socrates, trying to urge them on to further efforts for their
      master.
    

      “Will you permit your teacher to die?” they asked
      reproachfully in biting tones. “Or do you grudge the few coins it
      would take to bribe the guard?”
    

      In vain Crito besought Socrates to take to flight, and complained that the
      public, was upbraiding his disciples with lack of friendship and with
      avarice. The self-willed philosopher refused to gratify his pupils or the
      good people of Athens.
    

      “Let us investigate.” he said. “If it turns out that I
      must flee, I will flee; but if I must die, I will die. Let us remember
      what we once said—the wise man need not fear death, he need fear
      nothing but falsehood. Is it right to abide by the laws we ourselves have
      made so long as they are agreeable to us, and refuse to obey those which
      are disagreeable? If my memory does not deceive me I believe we once spoke
      of these things, did we not?”
    

      “Yes, we did,” answered his pupil.
    

      “And I think all were agreed as to the answer?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “But perhaps what is true for others is not true for us?”
    

      “No, truth is alike for all, including ourselves.”
    

      “But perhaps when we must die and not some one else, truth
      becomes untruth?”
    

      “No, Socrates, truth remains the truth under all circumstances.”
    

      After his pupil had thus agreed to each premise of Socrates in turn, he
      smiled and drew his conclusion.
    

      “If that is so, my friend, mustn’t I die? Or has my head
      already become so weak that I am no longer in a condition to draw a
      logical conclusion? Then correct me, my friend and show my erring brain
      the right way.”
    

      His pupil covered his face with his mantle and turned aside.
    

      “Yes,” he said, “now I see you must die.”
    

      And on that evening when the sea tossed hither and thither and roared
      dully under the load of fog, and the whimsical wind in mournful
      astonishment gently stirred the sails of the ships; when the citizens
      meeting on the streets asked one another: “Is he dead?” and
      their voices timidly betrayed the hope that he was not dead; when the
      first breath of awakened conscience, touched the hearts of the Athenians
      like the first messenger of the storm; and when, it seemed the very faces
      of the gods were darkened with shame—on that evening at the sinking
      of the sun the self-willed man drank the cup of death!
    

      The wind increased in violence and shrouded the city more closely in the
      veil of mist, angrily tugging at the sails of the vessels delayed in the
      harbour. And the Erinyes sang their gloomy songs to the hearts of the
      citizens and whipped up in their breasts that tempest which was later, to
      overwhelm the denouncers of Socrates.
    

      But in that hour the first stirrings of regret were still uncertain and
      confused. The citizens found more fault with Socrates than ever because he
      had not given them the satisfaction of fleeing to Thessaly; they were
      annoyed with his pupils because in the last days they had walked about in
      sombre mourning attire, a living reproach to the Athenians; they were
      vexed with the judges because they had not had the sense and the courage
      to resist the blind rage of the excited people; they bore even the gods
      resentment.
    

      “To you, ye gods, have we brought this sacrifice,” spoke many.
      “Rejoice, ye unsatiable!”
    

      “I know not which of us chooses the better lot!”
    

      Those words of Socrates came back to their memory, those his last words to
      the judges and to the people gathered in the court. Now he lay in the
      prison quiet and motionless under his cloak, while over the city hovered
      mourning, horror, and shame.
    

      Again he became the tormentor of the city, he who was himself no longer
      accessible to torment. The gadfly had been killed, but it stung the people
      more sharply than ever—sleep not, sleep not this night, O men of
      Athens! Sleep not! You have committed an injustice, a cruel injustice,
      which can never be erased!
    

      II
    

During those sad
      days Xenophon, the general, a pupil of Socrates, was marching with his Ten
      Thousand in a distant land, amid dangers, seeking a way of return to his
      beloved fatherland.
    

      Ãschines, Crito, Critobulus, PhÃ¦do, and Apollodorus were now occupied with
      the preparations for the modest funeral.
    

      Plato was burning his lamp and bending over a parchment; the best disciple
      of the philosopher was busy inscribing the deeds, words, and teachings
      that marked the end of the sage’s life. A thought is never lost, and
      the truth discovered by a great intellect illumines the way for future
      generations like a torch in the dark.
    

      There was one other disciple of Socrates. Not long before, the impetuous
      Ctesippus had been one of the most frivolous and pleasure-seeking of the
      Athenian youths. He had set up beauty as his sole god, and had bowed
      before Clinias as its highest exemplar. But since he had become acquainted
      with Socrates, all desire for pleasure and all light-mindedness had gone
      from him. He looked on indifferently while others took his place with
      Clinias. The grace of thought and the harmony of spirit that he found in
      Socrates seemed a hundred times more attractive than the graceful form and
      the harmonious features of Clinias. With all the intensity of his stormy
      temperament he hung on the man who had disturbed the serenity of his
      virginal soul, which for the first time opened to doubts as the bud of a
      young oak opens to the fresh winds of spring.
    

      Now that the master was dead, he could find peace neither at his own
      hearth nor in the oppressive stillness of the streets nor among his
      friends and fellow-disciples. The gods of hearth and home and the gods of
      the people inspired him with repugnance.
    

      “I know not,” he said, “whether ye are the best of all
      the gods to whom numerous generations have burned incense and brought
      offerings; all I know is that for your sake the blind mob extinguished the
      clear torch of truth, and for your sake sacrificed the greatest and best
      of mortals!”
    

      It almost seemed to Ctesippus as though the streets and market-places
      still echoed with the shrieking of that unjust sentence. And he remembered
      how it was here that the people clamoured for the execution of the
      generals who had led them to victory against the ArgunisÃ¦, and how
      Socrates alone had opposed the savage sentence of the judges and the blind
      rage of the mob. But when Socrates himself needed a champion, no one had
      been found to defend him with equal strength. Ctesippus blamed himself and
      his friends, and for that reason he wanted to avoid everybody—even
      himself, if possible.
    

      That evening he went to the sea. But his grief grew only the more violent.
      It seemed to him that the mourning daughters of Nereus were tossing hither
      and thither on the shore bewailing the death of the best of the Athenians
      and the folly of the frenzied city. The waves broke on the rocky coast
      with a growl of lament. Their booming sounded like a funeral dirge.
    

      He turned away, left the shore, and went on further without looking before
      him. He forgot time and space and his own ego, filled only with the
      afflicting thought of Socrates!
    

      “Yesterday he still was, yesterday his mild words still could be
      heard. How is it possible that to-day he no longer is? O night, O giant
      mountain shrouded in mist, O heaving sea moved by your own life, O
      restless winds that carry the breath of an immeasurable world on your
      wings, O starry vault flecked with flying clouds—take me to you,
      disclose to me the mystery of this death, if it is revealed to you! And if
      ye know not, then grant my ignorant soul your own lofty indifference.
      Remove from me these torturing questions. I no longer have strength to
      carry them in my bosom without an answer, without even the hope of an
      answer. For who shall answer them, now that the lips of Socrates are
      sealed in eternal silence, and eternal darkness is laid upon his lids?”
    

      Thus Ctesippus cried out to the sea and the mountains, and to the dark
      night, which followed its invariable course, ceaselessly, invisibly, over
      the slumbering world. Many hours passed before Ctesippus glanced up and
      saw whither his steps had unconsciously led him. A dark horror seized his
      soul as he looked about him.
    

      III
    

It seemed as if the
      unknown gods of eternal night had heard his impious prayer. Ctesippus
      looked about, without being able to recognise the place where he was. The
      lights of the city had long been extinguished by the darkness. The roaring
      of the sea had died away in the distance; his anxious soul had even lost
      the recollection of having heard it. No single sound—no mournful cry
      of nocturnal bird, nor whirr of wings, nor rustling of trees, nor murmur
      of a merry stream—broke the deep silence. Only the blind will-o’-the-wisps
      flickered here and there over rocks, and sheet-lightning, unaccompanied by
      any sound, flared up and died down against crag-peaks. This brief
      illumination merely emphasised the darkness; and the dead light disclosed
      the outlines of dead deserts crossed by gorges like crawling serpents, and
      rising into rocky heights in a wild chaos.
    

      All the joyous gods that haunt green groves, purling brooks, and mountain
      valleys seemed to have fled forever from these deserts. Pan alone, the
      great and mysterious Pan, was hiding somewhere nearby in the chaos of
      nature, and with mocking glance seemed to be pursuing the tiny ant that a
      short time before had blasphemously asked to know the secret of the world
      and of death. Dark, senseless horror overwhelmed the soul of Ctesippus. It
      is thus that the sea in stormy floodtide overwhelms a rock on the shore.
    

      Was it a dream, was it reality, or was it the revelation of the unknown
      divinity? Ctesippus felt that in an instant he would step across the
      threshold of life, and that his soul would melt into an ocean of unending,
      inconceivable horror like a drop of rain in the waves of the grey sea on a
      dark and stormy night. But at this moment he suddenly heard voices that
      seemed familiar to him, and in the glare of the sheet-lightning his eyes
      recognised human figures.
    

      IV
    

On a rocky slope
      sat a man in deep despair. He had thrown a cloak over his head and was
      bowed to the ground. Another figure approached him softly, cautiously
      climbing upward and carefully feeling every step. The first man uncovered
      his face and exclaimed:
    

      “Is that you I just now saw, my good Socrates? Is that you passing
      by me in this cheerless place? I have already spent many hours here
      without knowing when day will relieve the night. I have been waiting in
      vain for the dawn.”
    

      “Yes, I am Socrates, my friend, and you, are you not Elpidias who
      died three days before me?”
    

      “Yes, I am Elpidias, formerly the richest tanner in Athens, now the
      most miserable of slaves. For the first time I understand the words of the
      poet: ‘Better to be a slave in this world than a ruler in gloomy
      Hades.’”
    

      “My friend, if it is disagreeable for you where you are, why don’t
      you move to another spot?”
    

      “O Socrates, I marvel at you—how dare you wander about in this
      cheerless gloom? I—I sit here overcome with grief and bemoan the
      joys of a fleeting life.”
    

      “Friend Elpidias, like you, I, too, was plunged in this gloom when
      the light of earthly life was removed from my eyes. But an inner voice
      told me: ‘Tread this new path without hesitation’, and I went.”
    

      “But whither do you go, O son of Sophroniscus? Here there is no way,
      no path, not even a ray of light; nothing but a chaos of rocks, mist, and
      gloom.”
    

      “True. But, my Elpidias, since you are aware of this sad truth, have
      you not asked yourself what is the most distressing thing in your present
      situation?”
    

      “Undoubtedly the dismal darkness.”
    

      “Then one should seek for light. Perchance you will find here the
      great law—that mortals must in darkness seek the source of life. Do
      you not think it is better so to seek than to remain sitting in one spot?
      I think it is, therefore I keep walking. Farewell!”
    

      “Oh, good Socrates, abandon me not! You go with sure steps through
      the pathless chaos in Hades. Hold out to me but a fold of your mantle—”
    

      “If you think it is better for you, too, then follow me, friend
      Elpidias.”
    

      And the two shades walked on, while the soul of Ctesippus, released by
      sleep from its mortal envelop, flew after them, greedily absorbing the
      tones of the clear Socratic speech.
    

      “Are you here, good Socrates?” the voice of the Athenian again
      was heard. “Why are you silent? Converse shortens the way, and I
      swear, by Hercules, never did I have to traverse such a horrid way.”
    

      “Put questions, friend Elpidias! The question of one who seeks
      knowledge brings forth answers and produces conversation.”
    

      Elpidias maintained silence for a moment, and then, after he had collected
      his thoughts, asked:
    

      “Yes, this is what I wanted to say—tell me, my poor Socrates,
      did they at least give you a good burial?”
    

      “I must confess, friend Elpidias, I cannot satisfy your curiosity.”
    

      “I understand, my poor Socrates, it doesn’t help you cut a
      figure. Now with me it was so different! Oh, how they buried me, how
      magnificently they buried me, my poor fellow-Wanderer! I still think with
      great pleasure of those lovely moments after my death. First they washed
      me and sprinkled me with well-smelling balsam. Then my faithful Larissa
      dressed me in garments of the finest weave. The best mourning-women of the
      city tore their hair from their heads because they had been promised good
      pay, and in the family vault they placed an amphora—a crater with
      beautiful, decorated handles of bronze, and, besides, a vial.—”
    

      “Stay, friend Elpidias. I am convinced that the faithful Larissa
      converted her love into several minas. Yet—”
    

      “Exactly ten minas and four drachmas, not counting the drinks for
      the guests. I hardly think that the richest tanner can come before the
      souls of his ancestors and boast of such respect on the part of the
      living.”
    

      “Friend Elpidias, don’t you think that money would have been
      of more use to the poor people who are still alive in Athens than to you
      at this moment?”
    

      “Admit, Socrates, you are speaking in envy,” responded
      Elpidias, pained. “I am sorry for you, unfortunate Socrates,
      although, between ourselves, you really deserved your fate. I myself in
      the family circle said more than once that an end ought to be put to your
      impious doings, because—”
    

      “Stay, friend, I thought you wanted to draw a conclusion, and I fear
      you are straying from the straight path. Tell me, my good friend, whither
      does your wavering thought tend?”
    

      “I wanted to say that in my goodness I am sorry for you. A month ago
      I myself spoke against you in the assembly, but truly none of us who
      shouted so loud wanted such a great ill to befall you. Believe me, now I
      am all the sorrier for you, unhappy philosopher!”
    

      “I thank you. But tell me, my friend, do you perceive a brightness
      before your eyes?”
    

      “No, on the contrary such darkness lies before me that I must ask
      myself whether this is not the misty region of Orcus.”
    

      “This way, therefore, is just as dark for you as for me?”
    

      “Quite right.”
    

      “If I am not mistaken, you are even holding on to the folds of my
      cloak?”
    

      “Also true.”
    

      “Then we are in the same position? You see your ancestors are not
      hastening to rejoice in the tale of your pompous burial. Where is the
      difference between us, my good friend?”
    

      “But, Socrates, have the gods enveloped your reason in such
      obscurity that the difference is not clear to you?”
    

      “Friend, if your situation is clearer to you, then give me your hand
      and lead me, for I swear, by the dog, you let me go ahead in this
      darkness.”
    

      “Cease your scoffing, Socrates! Do not make sport, and do not
      compare yourself, your godless self, with a man who died in his own bed——“.
    

      “Ah, I believe I am beginning to understand you. But tell me,
      Elpidias, do you hope ever again to rejoice in your bed?”
    

      “Oh, I think not.”
    

      “And was there ever a time when you did not sleep in it?”
    

      “Yes. That was before I bought goods from Agesilaus at half their
      value. You see, that Agesilaus is really a deep-dyed rogue——”
    

      “Ah, never mind about Agesilaus! Perhaps he is getting them back,
      from your widow at a quarter their value. Then wasn’t I right when I
      said that you were in possession of your bed only part of the time?”
    

      “Yes, you were right.”
    

      “Well, and I, too, was in possession of the bed in which I died part
      of the time. Proteus, the good guard of the prison, lent it to me for a
      period.”
    

      “Oh, if I had known what you were aiming at with your talk, I wouldn’t
      have answered your wily questions. By Hercules, such profanation is
      unheard of—he compares himself with me! Why, I could put an end to
      you with two words, if it came to it——”
    

      “Say them, Elpidias, without fear. Words can scarcely be more
      destructive to me than the hemlock.”
    

      “Well, then, that is just what I wanted to say. You unfortunate man,
      you died by the sentence of the court and had to drink hemlock!”
    

      “But I have known that since the day of my death, even long before.
      And you, unfortunate Elpidias, tell me what caused your death?”
    

      “Oh, with me, it was different, entirely different! You see I got
      the dropsy in my abdomen. An expensive physician from Corinth was called
      who promised to cure me for two minas, and he was given half that amount
      in advance. I am afraid that Larissa in her lack of experience in such
      things gave him the other half, too——”
    

      “Then the physician did not keep his promise?”
    

      “That’s it.”
    

      “And you died from dropsy?”
    

      “Ah, Socrates, believe me, three times it wanted to vanquish me, and
      finally it quenched the flame of my life!”
    

      “Then tell me—did death by dropsy give you great pleasure?”
    

      “Oh, wicked Socrates, don’t make sport of me. I told you it
      wanted to vanquish me three times. I bellowed like a steer under the knife
      of the slaughterer, and begged the ParcÃ¦ to cut the thread of my life as
      quickly as possible.”
    

      “That doesn’t surprise me. But from what do you conclude that
      the dropsy was pleasanter to you than the hemlock to me? The hemlock made
      an end of me in a moment.”
    

      “I see, I fell into your snare again, you crafty sinner! I won’t
      enrage the gods still more by speaking with you, you destroyer of sacred
      customs.”
    

      Both were silent, and quiet reigned. But in a short while Elpidias was
      again the first to begin a conversation.
    

      “Why are you silent, good Socrates?”
    

      “My friend; didn’t you yourself ask for silence?”
    

      “I am not proud, and I can treat men who are worse than I am
      considerately. Don’t let us quarrel.”
    

      “I did not quarrel with you, friend Elpidias, and did not wish to
      say anything to insult you. I am merely accustomed to get at the truth of
      things by comparisons. My situation is not clear to me. You consider your
      situation better, and I should be glad to learn why. On the other hand, it
      would not hurt you to learn the truth, whatever shape it may take.”
    

      “Well, no more of this.”
    

      “Tell me, are you afraid? I don’t think that the feeling I now
      have can be called fear.”
    

      “I am afraid, although I have less cause than you to be at odds with
      the gods. But don’t you think that the gods, in abandoning us to
      ourselves here in this chaos, have cheated us of our hopes?”
    

      “That depends upon what sort of hopes they were. What did you expect
      from the gods, Elpidias?”
    

      “Well, well, what did I expect from the gods! What curious questions
      you ask, Socrates! If a man throughout life brings offerings, and at his
      death passes away with a pious heart and with all that custom demands, the
      gods might at least send some one to meet him, at least one of the
      inferior gods, to show a man the way. ... But that reminds me. Many a time
      when I begged for good luck in traffic in hides, I promised Hermes calves——”
    

      “And you didn’t have luck?”
    

      “Oh, yes, I had luck, good Socrates, but——“.
    

      “I understand, you had no calf.”
    

      “Bah! Socrates, a rich tanner and not have calves?”
    

      “Now I understand. You had luck, had calves, but you kept them for
      yourself, and Hermes received nothing.”
    

      “You’re a clever man. I’ve often said so. I kept only
      three of my ten oaths, and I didn’t deal differently with the other
      gods. If the same is the case with you, isn’t that the reason,
      possibly, why we are now abandoned by the gods? To be sure, I ordered
      Larissa to sacrifice a whole hecatomb after my death.”
    

      “But that is Larissa’s affair, whereas it was you, friend
      Elpidias, who made the promises.”
    

      “That’s true, that’s true. But you, good Socrates, could
      you, godless as you are, deal better with the gods than I who was a
      god-fearing tanner?”
    

      “My friend, I know not whether I dealt better or worse. At first I
      brought offerings without having made vows. Later I offered neither calves
      nor vows.”
    

      “What, not a single calf, you unfortunate man?”
    

      “Yes, friend, if Hermes had had to live by my gifts, I am afraid he
      would have grown very thin.”
    

      “I understand. You did not traffic in cattle, so you offered
      articles of some other trade—probably a mina or so of what the
      pupils paid you.”
    

      “You know, my friend, I didn’t ask pay of my pupils, and my
      trade scarcely sufficed to support me. If the gods reckoned on the sorry
      remnants of my meals they miscalculated.”
    

      “Oh, blasphemer, in comparison with you I can be proud of my piety.
      Ye gods, look upon this man! I did deceive you at times, but now and then
      I shared with you the surplus of some fortunate deal. He who gives at all
      gives much in comparison with a blasphemer who gives nothing. Socrates, I
      think you had better go on alone! I fear that your company, godless one,
      damages me in the eyes of the gods.”
    

      “As you will, good Elpidias. I swear by the dog no one shall force
      his company on another. Unhand the fold of my mantle, and farewell. I will
      go on alone.”
    

      And Socrates walked forward with a sure tread, feeling the ground,
      however, at every step.
    

      But Elpidias behind him instantly cried out:
    

      “Wait, wait, my good fellow-citizen, do not leave an Athenian alone
      in this horrible place! I was only making fun. Take what I said as a joke,
      and don’t go so quickly. I marvel how you can see a thing in this
      hellish darkness.”
    

      “Friend, I have accustomed my eyes to it.”
    

      “That’s good. Still I, can’t approve of your not having
      brought sacrifices to the gods. No, I can’t, poor Socrates, I can’t.
      The honourable Sophroniscus certainly taught you better in your youth, and
      you yourself used to take part in the prayers. I saw you.”
    

      “Yes. But I am accustomed to examine all our motives and to accept
      only those that after investigation prove to be reasonable. And so a day
      came on which I said to myself: ‘Socrates, here you are praying to
      the Olympians. Why are you praying to them?’”
    

      Elpidias laughed.
    

      “Really you philosophers sometimes don’t know how to answer
      the simplest questions. I’m a plain tanner who never in my life
      studied sophistry, yet I know why I must honour the Olympians.”
    

      “Tell me quickly, so that I, too, may know why.”
    

      “Why? Ha! Ha! It’s too simple, you wise Socrates.”
    

      “So much the better if it’s simple. But don’t keep your
      wisdom from me. Tell me—why must one honour the gods?”
    

      “Why. Because everybody does it.”
    

      “Friend, you know very well that not every one honours the gods.
      Wouldn’t it be more correct to say ‘many’?”
    

      “Very well, many.”
    

      “But tell me, don’t more men deal wickedly than righteously?”
    

      “I think so. You find more wicked people than good people.”
    

      “Therefore, if you follow the majority, you ought to deal wickedly
      and not righteously?”
    

      “What are you saying?”
    

      “I’m not saying it, you are. But I think the
      reason that men reverence the Olympians is not because the majority
      worship them. We must find another, more rational ground. Perhaps you mean
      they deserve reverence?”
    

      “Yes, very right.”
    

      “Good. But then arises a new question: Why do they deserve
      reverence?”
    

      “Because of their greatness.”
    

      “Ah, that’s more like it. Perhaps I will soon be agreeing with
      you. It only remains for you to tell me wherein their greatness consists.
      That’s a difficult question, isn’t it? Let us seek the answer
      together. Homer says that the impetuous Ares, when stretched flat on the
      ground by a stone thrown by Pallas Athene, covered with his body the space
      that can be travelled in seven mornings. You see what an enormous space.”
    

      “Is that wherein greatness consists?”
    

      “There you have me, my friend. That raises another question. Do you
      remember the athlete Theophantes? He towered over the people a whole head’s
      length, whereas Pericles was no larger than you. But whom do we call
      great, Pericles or Theophantes?”
    

      “I see that greatness does not consist in size of body. In that you’re
      right. I am glad we agree. Perhaps greatness consists in virtue?”
    

      “Certainly.”
    

      “I think so, too.”
    

      “Well, then, who must bow to whom? The small before the large, or
      those who are great in virtues before the wicked?”
    

      “The answer is clear.”
    

      “I think so, too. Now we will look further into this matter. Tell me
      truly, did you ever kill other people’s children with arrows?”
    

      “It goes without saying, never! Do you think so ill of me?”
    

      “Nor have you, I trust, ever seduced the wives of other men?”
    

      “I was an upright tanner and a good husband. Don’t forget
      that, Socrates, I beg of you!”
    

      “You never became a brute, nor by your lustfulness gave your
      faithful Larissa occasion to revenge herself on women whom you had ruined
      and on their innocent children?”
    

      “You anger me, really, Socrates.”
    

      “But perhaps you snatched your inheritance from your father and
      threw him into prison?”
    

      “Never! Why these insulting questions?”
    

      “Wait, my friend. Perhaps we will both reach a conclusion. Tell me,
      would you have considered a man great who had done all these things of
      which I have spoken?”
    

      “No, no, no! I should have called such a man a scoundrel, and lodged
      public complaint against him with the judges in the market-place.”
    

      “Well, Elpidias, why did you not complain in the market-place
      against Zeus and the Olympians? The son of Cronos carried on war with his
      own father, and was seized with brutal lust for the daughters of men,
      while Hera took vengeance upon innocent virgins. Did not both of them
      convert the unhappy daughter of Inachos into a common cow? Did not Apollo
      kill all the children of Niobe with his arrows? Did not Callenius steal
      bulls? Well, then, Elpidias, if it is true that he who has less virtue
      must do honour to him who has more, then you should not build altars to
      the Olympians, but they to you.”
    

      “Blaspheme not, impious Socrates! Keep quiet! How dare you judge the
      acts of the gods?”
    

      “Friend, a higher power has judged them. Let us investigate the
      question. What is the mark of divinity? I think you said, Greatness, which
      consists in virtue. Now is not this greatness the one divine spark in man?
      But if we test the greatness of the gods by our small human virtues, and
      it turns out that that which measures is greater than that which is
      measured, then it follows that the divine principle itself condemns the
      Olympians. But, then—”
    

      “What, then?”
    

      “Then, friend Elpidias, they are no gods, but deceptive phantoms,
      creations of a dream. Is it not so?”
    

      “Ah, that’s whither your talk leads, you bare-footed
      philosopher! Now I see what they said of you is true. You are like that
      fish that takes men captive with its look. So you took me captive in order
      to confound my believing soul and awaken doubt in it. It was already
      beginning to waver in its reverence for Zeus. Speak alone. I won’t
      answer any more.”
    

      “Be not wrathful, Elpidias! I don’t wish to inflict any evil
      upon you. But if you are tired of following my arguments to their logical
      conclusions, permit me to relate to you an allegory of a Milesian youth.
      Allegories rest the mind, and the relaxation is not unprofitable.”
    

      “Speak, if your story is not too long and its purpose is good.”
    

      “Its purpose is truth, friend Elpidias, and I will be brief. Once,
      you know, in ancient times, Miletus was exposed to the attacks of the
      barbarians. Among the youth who were seized was a son of the wisest and
      best of all the citizens in the land. His precious child was overtaken by
      a severe illness and became unconscious. He was abandoned and allowed to
      lie like worthless booty. In the dead of night he came to his senses. High
      above him glimmered the stars. Round about stretched the desert; and in
      the distance he heard the howl of beasts of prey. He was alone.
    

      “He was entirely alone, and, besides that, the gods had taken from
      him the recollection of his former life. In vain he racked his brain—it
      was as dark and empty as the inhospitable desert in which he found
      himself. But somewhere, far away, behind the misty and obscure figures
      conjured up by his reason, loomed the thought of his lost home, and a
      vague realisation of the figure of the best of all men; and in his heart
      resounded the word ‘father.’ Doesn’t it seem to you that
      the fate of this youth resembles the fate of all humanity?”
    

      “How so?”
    

      “Do we not all awake to life on earth with a hazy recollection of
      another home? And does not the figure of the great unknown hover before
      our souls?”
    

      “Continue, Socrates, I am listening.”
    

      “The youth revived, arose, and walked cautiously, seeking to avoid
      all dangers. When after long wanderings his strength was nearly gone, he
      discerned a fire in the misty distance which illumined the darkness and
      banished the cold. A faint hope crept into his weary soul, and the
      recollections of his father’s house again awoke within him. The
      youth walked toward the light, and cried: ‘It is you, my father, it
      is you!’
    

      “And was it his father’s house?”
    

      “No, it was merely a night lodging of wild nomads. So for many years
      he led the miserable life of a captive slave, and only in his dreams saw
      the distant home and rested on his father’s bosom. Sometimes with
      weak hand he endeavoured to lure from dead clay or wood or stone the face
      and form that ever hovered before him. There even came moments when he
      grew weary and embraced his own handiwork and prayed to it and wet it with
      his tears. But the stone remained cold stone. And as he waxed in years the
      youth destroyed his creations, which already seemed to him a vile
      defamation of his ever-present dreams. At last fate brought him to a good
      barbarian, who asked him for the cause of his constant mourning. When the
      youth, confided to him the hopes and longings of his soul, the barbarian,
      a wise man, said:
    

      “‘The world would be better did such a man and such a country
      exist as that of which you speak. But by what mark would you recognise
      your father?’
    

      “‘In my country,’ answered the youth, ‘they
      reverenced wisdom and virtue and looked up to my father as to the master.’
    

      “‘Well and good,’ answered the barbarian. ‘I must
      assume that a kernel of your father’s teaching resides in you.
      Therefore take up the wanderer’s staff, and proceed on your way.
      Seek perfect wisdom and truth, and when you have found them, cast aside
      your staff—there will be your home and your father.’
    

      “And the youth went on his way at break of day—”
    

      “Did he find the one whom he sought?”
    

      “He is still seeking. Many countries, cities and men has he seen. He
      has come to know all the ways by land; he has traversed the stormy seas;
      he has searched the courses of the stars in heaven by which a pilgrim can
      direct his course in the limitless deserts. And each time that on his
      wearisome way an inviting fire lighted up the darkness before his eyes,
      his heart beat faster and hope crept into his soul. 'That is my father’s
      hospitable house,’ he thought.
    

      “And when a hospitable host would greet the tired traveller and
      offer him the peace and blessing of his hearth, the youth would fall at
      his feet and say with emotion: ‘I thank you, my father! Do you not
      recognise your son?’
    

      “And many were prepared to take him as their son, for at that time
      children were frequently kidnapped. But after the first glow of
      enthusiasm, the youth would detect traces of imperfection, sometimes even
      of wickedness. Then he would begin to investigate and to test his host
      with questions concerning justice and injustice. And soon he would be
      driven forth again upon the cold wearisome way. More than once he said to
      himself: ‘I will remain at this last hearth, I will preserve my last
      belief. It shall be the home of my father.’”
    

      “Do you know, Socrates, perhaps that would have been the most
      sensible thing to do.”
    

      “So he thought sometimes. But the habit of investigating, the
      confused dream of a father, gave him no peace. Again and again he shook
      the dust from his feet; again and again he grasped his staff. Not a few
      stormy nights found him shelterless. Doesn’t it seem to you that the
      fate of this youth resembles the fate of mankind?”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Does not the race of man make trial of its childish belief and
      doubt it while seeking the unknown? Doesn’t it fashion the form of
      its father in wood, stone, custom, and tradition? And then man finds the
      form imperfect, destroys it, and again goes on his wanderings in the
      desert of doubt. Always for the purpose of seeking something better—”
    

      “Oh, you cunning sage, now I understand the purpose of your
      allegory! And I will tell you to your face that if only a ray of light
      were to penetrate this gloom, I would not put the Lord on trial with
      unnecessary questions—”
    

      “Friend, the light is already shining,” answered Socrates.
    

      V
    

It seemed as if the
      words of the philosopher had taken effect. High up in the distance a beam
      of light penetrated a vapoury envelop and disappeared in the mountains. It
      was followed by a second and a third. There beyond the darkness luminous
      genii seemed to be hovering, and a great mystery seemed about to be
      revealed, as if the breath of life were blowing, as if some great ceremony
      were in process. But it was still very remote. The shades descended
      thicker and thicker; foggy clouds rolled into masses, separated, and
      chased one another endlessly, ceaselessly.
    

      A blue light from a distant peak fell upon a deep ravine; the clouds rose
      and covered the heavens to the zenith.
    

      The rays disappeared and withdrew to a greater and greater distance, as if
      fleeing from this vale of shades and horrors. Socrates stood and looked
      after them sadly. Elpidias peered up at the peak full of dread.
    

      “Look, Socrates! What do you see there on the mountain?”
    

      “Friend,” answered; the philosopher, “let us investigate
      our situation. Since we are in motion, we must arrive somewhere, and since
      earthly existence must have a limit, I believe that this limit is to be
      found at the parting of two beginnings. In the struggle of light with
      darkness we attain the crown of our endeavours. Since the ability to think
      has not been taken from us, I believe that it is the will of the divine
      being who called our power of thinking into existence that we should
      investigate the goal of our endeavours ourselves. Therefore, Elpidias, let
      us in dignified manner go to meet the dawn that lies beyond those clouds.”
    

      “Oh, my friend! If that is the dawn, I would rather the long
      cheerless night had endured forever, for it was quiet and peaceful. Don’t
      you think our time passed tolerably well in instructive converse? And now
      my soul trembles before the tempest drawing nigh. Say what you will, but
      there before us are no ordinary shades of the dead night.”
    

      Zeus hurled a bolt into the bottomless gulf.
    

      Ctesippus looked up to the peak, and his soul was frozen with horror. Huge
      sombre figures of the Olympian gods crowded on the mountain in a circle. A
      last ray shot through the region of clouds and mists, and died away like a
      faint memory. A storm was approaching now, and the powers of night were
      once more in the ascendant. Dark figures covered the heavens. In the
      centre Ctesippus could discern the all-powerful son of Cronos surrounded
      by a halo. The sombre figures of the older gods encircled him in wrathful
      excitement. Like flocks of birds winging their way in the twilight, like
      eddies of dust driven by a hurricane, like autumn leaves lashed by Boreas,
      numerous minor gods hovered in long clouds and occupied the spaces.
    

      When the clouds gradually lifted from the peak and sent down dismal horror
      to embrace the earth, Ctesippus fell upon his knees. Later, he admitted
      that in this dreadful moment he forgot all his master’s deductions
      and conclusions. His courage failed him; and terror took possession of his
      soul.
    

      He merely listened.
    

      Two voices resounded there where before had been silence, the one the
      mighty and threatening voice of the Godhead, the other the weak voice of a
      mortal which the wind carried from the mountain slope to the spot where
      Ctesippus had left Socrates.
    

      “Are you,” thus spake the voice from the clouds, “are
      you the blasphemous Socrates who strives with the gods of heaven and
      earth? Once there were none so joyous, so immortal, as we. Now, for long
      we have passed our days in darkness because of the unbelief and doubt that
      have come upon earth. Never has the mist closed in on us so heavily as
      since the time your voice resounded in Athens, the city we once so dearly
      loved. Why did you not follow the commands of your father, Sophroniscus?
      The good man permitted himself a few little sins, especially in his youth,
      yet by way of recompense, we frequently enjoyed the smell of his offerings—”
    

      “Stay, son of Cronos, and solve my doubts! Do I understand that you
      prefer cowardly hypocrisy to searchings for the truth?”
    

      At this question the crags trembled with the shock of a thundering peal.
      The first breath of the tempest scattered in the distant gorges. But the
      mountains still trembled, for he who was enthroned upon them still
      trembled. And in the anxious quiet of the night only distant sighs could
      be heard.
    

      In the very bowels of the earth the chained Titans seemed to be groaning
      under the blow of the son of Cronos.
    

      “Where are you now, you impious questioner?” suddenly came the
      mocking voice of the Olympian.
    

      “I am here, son of Cronos, on the same spot. Nothing but your answer
      can move me from it. I am waiting.”
    

      Thunder bellowed in the clouds like a wild animal amazed at the daring of
      a Lybian tamer’s fearless approach. At the end of a few moments the
      Voice again rolled over the spaces:
    

      “Son of Sophroniscus! Is it not enough that you bred so much
      scepticism on earth that the clouds of your doubt reached even to Olympus?
      Indeed, many a time when you were carrying on your discourse in the
      market-places or in the academies or on the promenades, it seemed to me as
      if you had already destroyed all the altars on earth, and the dust were
      rising from them up to us here on the mountain. Even that is not enough!
      Here before my very face you will not recognise the power of the immortals—”
    

      “Zeus, thou art wrathful. Tell me, who gave me the ‘Daemon’
      which spoke to my soul throughout my life and forced me to seek the truth
      without resting?”
    

      Mysterious silence reigned in the clouds.
    

      “Was it not you? You are silent? Then I will investigate the matter.
      Either this divine beginning emanates from you or from some one else. If
      from you, I bring it to you as an offering. I offer you the ripe fruit of
      my life, the flame of the spark of your own kindling! See, son of Cronos,
      I preserved my gift; in my deepest heart grew the seed that you sowed. It
      is the very fire of my soul. It burned in those crises when with my own
      hand I tore the thread of life. Why will you not accept it? Would you have
      me regard you as a poor master whose age prevents him from seeing that his
      own pupil obediently follows out his commands? Who are you that would
      command me to stifle the flame that has illuminated my whole life, ever
      since it was penetrated by the first ray of sacred thought? The sun says
      not to the stars: ‘Be extinguished that I may rise.’ The sun
      rises and the weak glimmer of the stars is quenched by its far, far
      stronger light. The day says not to the torch: ‘Be extinguished; you
      interfere with me.’ The day breaks, and the torch smokes, but no
      longer shines. The divinity that I am questing is not you who are afraid
      of doubt. That divinity is like the day, like the sun, and shines without
      extinguishing other lights. The god I seek is the god who would say to me:
      ‘Wanderer, give me your torch, you no longer need it, for I am the
      source of all light. Searcher for truth, set upon my altar the little gift
      of your doubt, because in me is its solution.’ If you are that god,
      harken to my questions. No one kills his own child, and my doubts are a
      branch of the eternal spirit whose name is truth.”
    

      Round about, the fires of heaven tore the dark clouds, and out of the
      howling storm again resounded the powerful voice:
    

      “Whither did your doubts tend, you arrogant sage, who renounce
      humility, the most beautiful adornment of earthly virtues? You abandoned
      the friendly shelter of credulous simplicity to wander in the desert of
      doubt. You have seen this dead space from which the living gods have
      departed. Will you traverse it, you insignificant worm, who crawl in the
      dust of your pitiful profanation of the gods? Will you vivify the world?
      Will you conceive the unknown divinity to whom you do not dare to pray?
      You miserable digger of dung, soiled by the smut of ruined altars, are you
      perchance the architect who shall build the new temple? Upon what do you
      base your hopes, you who disavow the old gods and have no new gods to take
      their place? The eternal night of doubts unsolved, the dead desert,
      deprived of the living spirit—this is your world, you pitiful
      worm, who gnawed at the living belief which was a refuge for simple
      hearts, who converted the world into a dead chaos. Now, then, where are
      you, you insignificant, blasphemous sage?”
    

      Nothing was heard but the mighty storm roaring through the spaces. Then
      the thunder died away, the wind folded its pinions, and torrents of rain
      streamed through the darkness, like incessant floods of tears which
      threatened to devour the earth and drown it in a deluge of unquenchable
      grief.
    

      It seemed to Ctesippus that the master was overcome, and that the
      fearless, restless, questioning voice had been silenced forever. But a few
      moments later it issued again from the same spot.
    

      “Your words, son of Cronos, hit the mark better than your
      thunderbolts. The thoughts you have cast into my terrified soul have
      haunted me often, and it has sometimes seemed as if my heart would break
      under the burden of their unendurable anguish. Yes, I abandoned the
      friendly shelter of credulous simplicity. Yes, I have seen the spaces from
      which the living gods have departed enveloped in the night of eternal
      doubt. But I walked without fear, for my ‘Daemon’ lighted the
      way, the divine beginning of all life. Let us investigate the question.
      Are not offerings of incense burnt on your altars in the name of Him who
      gives life? You are stealing what belongs to another! Not you, but that
      other, is served by credulous simplicity. Yes, you are right, I am no
      architect. I am not the builder of a new temple. Not to me was it given to
      raise from the earth to the heavens the glorious structure of the coming
      faith. I am one who digs dung, soiled by the smut of destruction. But my
      conscience tells me, son of Cronos, that the work of one who digs dung is
      also necessary for the future temple. When the time comes for the proud
      and stately edifice to stand on the purified place, and for the living
      divinity of the new belief to erect his throne upon it, I, the modest
      digger of dung, will go to him and say: ‘Here am I who restlessly
      crawled in the dust of disavowal. When surrounded by fog and soot, I had
      no time to raise my eyes from the ground; my head had only a vague
      conception of the future building. Will you reject me, you just one, Just,
      and True, and Great?’”
    

      Silence and astonishment reigned in the spaces. Then Socrates raised his
      voice, and continued:
    

      “The sunbeam falls upon the filthy puddle, and light vapour, leaving
      heavy mud behind, rises to the sun, melts, and dissolves in the ether.
      With your sunbeam you touched my dust-laden soul and it aspired to you,
      Unknown One, whose name is mystery! I sought for you, because you are
      Truth; I strove to attain to you, because you are Justice; I loved you,
      because you are Love; I died for you, because you are the Source of Life.
      Will you reject me, O Unknown? My torturing doubts, my passionate search
      for truth, my difficult life, my voluntary death—accept them as a
      bloodless offering, as a prayer, as a sigh! Absorb them as the
      immeasurable ether absorbs the evaporating mists! Take them, you whose
      name I do not know, let not the ghosts of the night I have traversed bar
      the way to you, to eternal light! Give way, you shades who dim the light
      of the dawn! I tell you, gods of my people, you are unjust, and where
      there is no justice there can be no truth, but only phantoms, creations of
      a dream. To this conclusion have I come, I, Socrates, who sought to fathom
      all things. Rise, dead mists, I go my way to Him whom I have sought all my
      life long!”
    

      The thunder burst again—a short, abrupt peal, as if the egis had
      fallen from the weakened hand of the thunderer. Storm-voices trembled from
      the mountains, sounding dully in the gorges, and died away in the clefts.
      In their place resounded other, marvellous tones.
    

      When Ctesippus looked up in astonishment, a spectacle presented itself
      such as no mortal eyes had ever seen.
    

      The night vanished. The clouds lifted, and godly figures floated in the
      azure like golden ornaments on the hem of a festive robe. Heroic forms
      glimmered over the remote crags and ravines, and Elpidias, whose little
      figure was seen standing at the edge of a cleft in the rocks, stretched
      his hands toward them, as if beseeching the vanishing gods for a solution
      of his fate.
    

      A mountain-peak now stood out clearly above the mysterious mist, gleaming
      like a torch over dark blue valleys. The son of Cronos, the thunderer, was
      no longer enthroned upon it, and the other Olympians too were gone.
    

      Socrates stood alone in the light of the sun under the high heavens.
    

      Ctesippus was distinctly conscious of the pulse-beat of a mysterious life
      quivering throughout nature, stirring even the tiniest blade of grass.
    

      A breath seemed to be stirring the balmy air, a voice to be sounding in
      wonderful harmony, an invisible tread to be heard—the tread of the
      radiant Dawn!
    

      And on the illumined peak a man still stood, stretching out his arms in
      mute ecstasy, moved by a mighty impulse.
    

      A moment, and all disappeared, and the light of an ordinary day shone upon
      the awakened soul of Ctesippus. It was like dismal twilight after the
      revelation of nature that had blown upon him the breath of an unknown
      life.
    








      In deep silence the pupils of the philosopher listened to the marvellous
      recital of Ctesippus. Plato broke the silence.
    

      “Let us investigate the dream and its significance,” he said.
    

      “Let us investigate it,” responded the others.
    











      THE SIGNAL
    

      BY VSEVOLOD M. GARSHIN.
    

Semyon Ivanov was a
      track-walker. His hut was ten versts away from a railroad station in one
      direction and twelve versts away in the other. About four versts away
      there was a cotton mill that had opened the year before, and its tall
      chimney rose up darkly from behind the forest. The only dwellings around
      were the distant huts of the other track-walkers.
    

      Semyon Ivanov’s health had been completely shattered. Nine years
      before he had served right through the war as servant to an officer. The
      sun had roasted him, the cold frozen him, and hunger famished him on the
      forced marches of forty and fifty versts a day in the heat and the cold
      and the rain and the shine. The bullets had whizzed about him, but, thank
      God! none had struck him.
    

      Semyon’s regiment had once been on the firing line. For a whole week
      there had been skirmishing with the Turks, only a deep ravine separating
      the two hostile armies; and from morn till eve there had been a steady
      cross-fire. Thrice daily Semyon carried a steaming samovar and his officer’s
      meals from the camp kitchen to the ravine. The bullets hummed about him
      and rattled viciously against the rocks. Semyon was terrified and cried
      sometimes, but still he kept right on. The officers were pleased with him,
      because he always had hot tea ready for them.
    

      He returned from the campaign with limbs unbroken but crippled with
      rheumatism. He had experienced no little sorrow since then. He arrived
      home to find that his father, an old man, and his little four-year-old son
      had died. Semyon remained alone with his wife. They could not do much. It
      was difficult to plough with rheumatic arms and legs. They could no longer
      stay in their village, so they started off to seek their fortune in new
      places. They stayed for a short time on the line, in Kherson and
      Donshchina, but nowhere found luck. Then the wife went out to service, and
      Semyon continued to travel about. Once he happened to ride on an engine,
      and at one of the stations the face of the station-master seemed familiar
      to him. Semyon looked at the station-master and the station-master looked
      at Semyon, and they recognised each other. He had been an officer in
      Semyon’s regiment.
    

      “You are Ivanov?” he said.
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      “How do you come to be here?”
    

      Semyon told him all.
    

      “Where are you off to?”
    

      “I cannot tell you, sir.”
    

      “Idiot! What do you mean by ‘cannot tell you?’”
    

      “I mean what I say, your Excellency. There is nowhere for me to go
      to. I must hunt for work, sir.”
    

      The station-master looked at him, thought a bit, and said: “See
      here, friend, stay here a while at the station. You are married, I think.
      Where is your wife?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency, I am married. My wife is at Kursk, in service
      with a merchant.”
    

      “Well, write to your wife to come here. I will give you a free pass
      for her. There is a position as track-walker open. I will speak to the
      Chief on your behalf.”
    

      “I shall be very grateful to you, your Excellency,” replied
      Semyon.
    

      He stayed at the station, helped in the kitchen, cut firewood, kept the
      yard clean, and swept the platform. In a fortnight’s time his wife
      arrived, and Semyon went on a hand-trolley to his hut. The hut was a new
      one and warm, with as much wood as he wanted. There was a little vegetable
      garden, the legacy of former track-walkers, and there was about half a
      dessiatin of ploughed land on either side of the railway embankment.
      Semyon was rejoiced. He began to think of doing some farming, of
      purchasing a cow and a horse.
    

      He was given all necessary stores—a green flag, a red flag,
      lanterns, a horn, hammer, screw-wrench for the nuts, a crow-bar, spade,
      broom, bolts, and nails; they gave him two books of regulations and a
      time-table of the train. At first Semyon could not sleep at night, and
      learnt the whole time-table by heart. Two hours before a train was due he
      would go over his section, sit on the bench at his hut, and look and
      listen whether the rails were trembling or the rumble of the train could
      be heard. He even learned the regulations by heart, although he could only
      read by spelling out each word.
    

      It was summer; the work was not heavy; there was no snow to clear away,
      and the trains on that line were infrequent. Semyon used to go over his
      verst twice a day, examine and screw up nuts here and there, keep the bed
      level, look at the water-pipes, and then go home to his own affairs. There
      was only one drawback—he always had to get the inspector’s
      permission for the least little thing he wanted to do. Semyon and his wife
      were even beginning to be bored.
    

      Two months passed, and Semyon commenced to make the acquaintance of his
      neighbours, the track-walkers on either side of him. One was a very old
      man, whom the authorities were always meaning to relieve. He scarcely
      moved out of his hut. His wife used to do all his work. The other
      track-walker, nearer the station, was a young man, thin, but muscular. He
      and Semyon met for the first time on the line midway between the huts.
      Semyon took off his hat and bowed. “Good health to you, neighbour,”
      he said.
    

      The neighbour glanced askance at him. “How do you do?” he
      replied; then turned around and made off.
    

      Later the wives met. Semyon’s wife passed the time of day with her
      neighbour, but neither did she say much.
    

      On one occasion Semyon said to her: “Young woman, your husband is
      not very talkative.”
    

      The woman said nothing at first, then replied: “But what is there
      for him to talk about? Every one has his own business. Go your way, and
      God be with you.”
    

      However, after another month or so they became acquainted. Semyon would go
      with Vasily along the line, sit on the edge of a pipe, smoke, and talk of
      life. Vasily, for the most part, kept silent, but Semyon talked of his
      village, and of the campaign through which he had passed.
    

      “I have had no little sorrow in my day,” he would say; “and
      goodness knows I have not lived long. God has not given me happiness, but
      what He may give, so will it be. That’s so, friend Vasily Stepanych.”
    

      Vasily Stepanych knocked the ashes out of his pipe against a rail, stood
      up, and said: “It is not luck which follows us in life, but human
      beings. There is no crueller beast on this earth than man. Wolf does not
      eat wolf, but man will readily devour man.”
    

      “Come, friend, don’t say that; a wolf eats wolf.”
    

      “The words came into my mind and I said it. All the same, there is
      nothing crueller than man. If it were not for his wickedness and greed, it
      would be possible to live. Everybody tries to sting you to the quick, to
      bite and eat you up.”
    

      Semyon pondered a bit. “I don’t know, brother,” he said;
      “perhaps it is as you say, and perhaps it is God’s will.”
    

      “And perhaps,” said Vasily, “it is waste of time for me
      to talk to you. To put everything unpleasant on God, and sit and suffer,
      means, brother, being not a man but an animal. That’s what I have to
      say.” And he turned and went off without saying good-bye.
    

      Semyon also got up. “Neighbour,” he called, “why do you
      lose your temper?” But his neighbour did not look round, and kept on
      his way.
    

      Semyon gazed after him until he was lost to sight in the cutting at the
      turn. He went home and said to his wife: “Arina, our neighbour is a
      wicked person, not a man.”
    

      However, they did not quarrel. They met again and discussed the same
      topics.
    

      “All, mend, if it were not for men we should not be poking in these
      huts,” said Vasily, on one occasion.
    

      “And what if we are poking in these huts? It’s not so bad. You
      can live in them.”
    

      “Live in them, indeed! Bah, you!... You have lived long and learned
      little, looked at much and seen little. What sort of life is there for a
      poor man in a hut here or there? The cannibals are devouring you. They are
      sucking up all your life-blood, and when you become old, they will throw
      you out just as they do husks to feed the pigs on. What pay do you get?”
    

      “Not much, Vasily Stepanych—twelve rubles.”
    

      “And I, thirteen and a half rubles. Why? By the regulations the
      company should give us fifteen rubles a month with firing and lighting.
      Who decides that you should have twelve rubles, or I thirteen and a half?
      Ask yourself! And you say a man can live on that? You understand it is not
      a question of one and a half rubles or three rubles—even if they
      paid us each the whole fifteen rubles. I was at the station last month.
      The director passed through. I saw him. I had that honour. He had a
      separate coach. He came out and stood on the platform... I shall not stay
      here long; I shall go somewhere, anywhere, follow my nose.”
    

      “But where will you go, Stepanych? Leave well enough alone. Here you
      have a house, warmth, a little piece of land. Your wife is a worker.”
    

      “Land! You should look at my piece of land. Not a twig on it—nothing.
      I planted some cabbages in the spring, just when the inspector came along.
      He said: ‘What is this? Why have you not reported this? Why have you
      done this without permission? Dig them up, roots and all.’ He was
      drunk. Another time he would not have said a word, but this time it struck
      him. Three rubles fine!...”
    

      Vasily kept silent for a while, pulling at his pipe, then added quietly:
      “A little more and I should have done for him.”
    

      “You are hot-tempered.”
    

      “No, I am not hot-tempered, but I tell the truth and think. Yes, he
      will still get a bloody nose from me. I will complain to the Chief. We
      will see then!” And Vasily did complain to the Chief.
    

      Once the Chief came to inspect the line. Three days later important
      personages were coming from St. Petersburg and would pass over the line.
      They were conducting an inquiry, so that previous to their journey it was
      necessary to put everything in order. Ballast was laid down, the bed was
      levelled, the sleepers carefully examined, spikes driven in a bit, nuts
      screwed up, posts painted, and orders given for yellow sand to be
      sprinkled at the level crossings. The woman at the neighbouring hut turned
      her old man out to weed. Semyon worked for a whole week. He put everything
      in order, mended his kaftan, cleaned and polished his brass plate until it
      fairly shone. Vasily also worked hard. The Chief arrived on a trolley,
      four men working the handles and the levers making the six wheels hum. The
      trolley travelled at twenty versts an hour, but the wheels squeaked. It
      reached Semyon’s hut, and he ran out and reported in soldierly
      fashion. All appeared to be in repair.
    

      “Have you been here long?” inquired the Chief.
    

      “Since the second of May, your Excellency.”
    

      “All right. Thank you. And who is at hut No. 164?”
    

      The traffic inspector (he was travelling with the Chief on the trolley)
      replied: “Vasily Spiridov.”
    

      “Spiridov, Spiridov... Ah! is he the man against whom you made a
      note last year?”
    

      “He is.”
    

      “Well, we will see Vasily Spiridov. Go on!” The workmen laid
      to the handles, and the trolley got under way. Semyon watched it, and
      thought, “There will be trouble between them and my neighbour.”
    

      About two hours later he started on his round. He saw some one coming
      along the line from the cutting. Something white showed on his head.
      Semyon began to look more attentively. It was Vasily. He had a stick in
      his hand, a small bundle on his shoulder, and his cheek was bound up in a
      handkerchief.
    

      “Where are you off to?” cried Semyon.
    

      Vasily came quite close. He was very pale, white as chalk, and his eyes
      had a wild look. Almost choking, he muttered: “To town—to
      Moscow—to the head office.”
    

      “Head office? Ah, you are going to complain, I suppose. Give it up!
      Vasily Stepanych, forget it.”
    

      “No, mate, I will not forget. It is too late. See! He struck me in
      the face, drew blood. So long as I live I will not forget. I will not
      leave it like this!”
    

      Semyon took his hand. “Give it up, Stepanych. I am giving you good
      advice. You will not better things...”
    

      “Better things! I know myself I shan’t better things. You were
      right about Fate. It would be better for me not to do it, but one must
      stand up for the right.” “But tell me, how did it happen?”
    

      “How? He examined everything, got down from the trolley, looked into
      the hut. I knew beforehand that he would be strict, and so I had put
      everything into proper order. He was just going when I made my complaint.
      He immediately cried out: ‘Here is a Government inquiry coming, and
      you make a complaint about a vegetable garden. Here are privy councillors
      coming, and you annoy me with cabbages!’ I lost patience and said
      something—not very much, but it offended him, and he struck me in
      the face. I stood still; I did nothing, just as if what he did was
      perfectly all right. They went off; I came to myself, washed my face, and
      left.”
    

      “And what about the hut?”
    

      “My wife is staying there. She will look after things. Never mind
      about their roads.”
    

      Vasily got up and collected himself. “Good-bye, Ivanov. I do not
      know whether I shall get any one at the office to listen to me.”
    

      “Surely you are not going to walk?”
    

      “At the station I will try to get on a freight train, and to-morrow
      I shall be in Moscow.”
    

      The neighbours bade each other farewell. Vasily was absent for some time.
      His wife worked for him night and day. She never slept, and wore herself
      out waiting for her husband. On the third day the commission arrived. An
      engine, luggage-van, and two first-class saloons; but Vasily was still
      away. Semyon saw his wife on the fourth day. Her face was swollen from
      crying and her eyes were red.
    

      “Has your husband returned?” he asked. But the woman only made
      a gesture with her hands, and without saying a word went her way.
    

      Semyon had learnt when still a lad to make flutes out of a kind of reed.
      He used to burn out the heart of the stalk, make holes where necessary,
      drill them, fix a mouthpiece at one end, and tune them so well that it was
      possible to play almost any air on them. He made a number of them in his
      spare time, and sent them by his friends amongst the freight brakemen to
      the bazaar in the town. He got two kopeks apiece for them. On the day
      following the visit of the commission he left his wife at home to meet the
      six o’clock train, and started off to the forest to cut some sticks.
      He went to the end of his section—at this point the line made a
      sharp turn—descended the embankment, and struck into the wood at the
      foot of the mountain. About half a verst away there was a big marsh,
      around which splendid reeds for his flutes grew. He cut a whole bundle of
      stalks and started back home. The sun was already dropping low, and in the
      dead stillness only the twittering of the birds was audible, and the
      crackle of the dead wood under his feet. As he walked along rapidly, he
      fancied he heard the clang of iron striking iron, and he redoubled his
      pace. There was no repair going on in his section. What did it mean? He
      emerged from the woods, the railway embankment stood high before him; on
      the top a man was squatting on the bed of the line busily engaged in
      something. Semyon commenced quietly to crawl up towards him. He thought it
      was some one after the nuts which secure the rails. He watched, and the
      man got up, holding a crow-bar in his hand. He had loosened a rail, so
      that it would move to one side. A mist swam before Semyon’s eyes; he
      wanted to cry out, but could not. It was Vasily! Semyon scrambled up the
      bank, as Vasily with crow-bar and wrench slid headlong down the other
      side.
    

      “Vasily Stepanych! My dear friend, come back! Give me the crow-bar.
      We will put the rail back; no one will know. Come back! Save your soul
      from sin!”
    

      Vasily did not look back, but disappeared into the woods.
    

      Semyon stood before the rail which had been torn up. He threw down his
      bundle of sticks. A train was due; not a freight, but a passenger-train.
      And he had nothing with which to stop it, no flag. He could not replace
      the rail and could not drive in the spikes with his bare hands. It was
      necessary to run, absolutely necessary to run to the hut for some tools.
      “God help me!” he murmured.
    

      Semyon started running towards his hut. He was out of breath, but still
      ran, falling every now and then. He had cleared the forest; he was only a
      few hundred feet from his hut, not more, when he heard the distant hooter
      of the factory sound—six o’clock! In two minutes’ time
      No. 7 train was due. “Oh, Lord! Have pity on innocent souls!”
      In his mind Semyon saw the engine strike against the loosened rail with
      its left wheel, shiver, careen, tear up and splinter the sleepers—and
      just there, there was a curve and the embankment seventy feet high, down
      which the engine would topple—and the third-class carriages would be
      packed ... little children... All sitting in the train now, never dreaming
      of danger. “Oh, Lord! Tell me what to do!... No, it is impossible to
      run to the hut and get back in time.”
    

      Semyon did not run on to the hut, but turned back and ran faster than
      before. He was running almost mechanically, blindly; he did not know
      himself what was to happen. He ran as far as the rail which had been
      pulled up; his sticks were lying in a heap. He bent down, seized one
      without knowing why, and ran on farther. It seemed to him the train was
      already coming. He heard the distant whistle; he heard the quiet, even
      tremor of the rails; but his strength was exhausted, he could run no
      farther, and came to a halt about six hundred feet from the awful spot.
      Then an idea came into his head, literally like a ray of light. Pulling
      off his cap, he took out of it a cotton scarf, drew his knife out of the
      upper part of his boot, and crossed himself, muttering, “God bless
      me!”
    

      He buried the knife in his left arm above the elbow; the blood spurted
      out, flowing in a hot stream. In this he soaked his scarf, smoothed it
      out, tied it to the stick and hung out his red flag.
    

      He stood waving his flag. The train was already in sight. The driver would
      not see him—would come close up, and a heavy train cannot be pulled
      up in six hundred feet.
    

      And the blood kept on flowing. Semyon pressed the sides of the wound
      together so as to close it, but the blood did not diminish. Evidently he
      had cut his arm very deep. His head commenced to swim, black spots began
      to dance before his eyes, and then it became dark. There was a ringing in
      his ears. He could not see the train or hear the noise. Only one thought
      possessed him. “I shall not be able to keep standing up. I shall
      fall and drop the flag; the train will pass over me. Help me, oh Lord!”
    

      All turned black before him, his mind became a blank, and he dropped the
      flag; but the blood-stained banner did not fall to the ground. A hand
      seized it and held it high to meet the approaching train. The engineer saw
      it, shut the regulator, and reversed steam. The train came to a
      standstill.
    

      People jumped out of the carriages and collected in a crowd. They saw a
      man lying senseless on the footway, drenched in blood, and another man
      standing beside him with a blood-stained rag on a stick.
    

      Vasily looked around at all. Then, lowering his head, he said: “Bind
      me. I tore up a rail!”
    











      THE DARLING
    

      BY ANTON P. CHEKOV
    

Olenka, the
      daughter of the retired collegiate assessor Plemyanikov, was sitting on
      the back-door steps of her house doing nothing. It was hot, the flies were
      nagging and teasing, and it was pleasant to think that it would soon be
      evening. Dark rain clouds were gathering from the east, wafting a breath
      of moisture every now and then.
    

      Kukin, who roomed in the wing of the same house, was standing in the yard
      looking up at the sky. He was the manager of the Tivoli, an open-air
      theatre.
    

      “Again,” he said despairingly. “Rain again. Rain, rain,
      rain! Every day rain! As though to spite me. I might as well stick my head
      into a noose and be done with it. It’s ruining me. Heavy losses
      every day!” He wrung his hands, and continued, addressing Olenka:
      “What a life, Olga Semyonovna! It’s enough to make a man weep.
      He works, he does his best, his very best, he tortures himself, he passes
      sleepless nights, he thinks and thinks and thinks how to do everything
      just right. And what’s the result? He gives the public the best
      operetta, the very best pantomime, excellent artists. But do they want it?
      Have they the least appreciation of it? The public is rude. The public is
      a great boor. The public wants a circus, a lot of nonsense, a lot of
      stuff. And there’s the weather. Look! Rain almost every evening. It
      began to rain on the tenth of May, and it’s kept it up through the
      whole of June. It’s simply awful. I can’t get any audiences,
      and don’t I have to pay rent? Don’t I have to pay the actors?”
    

      The next day towards evening the clouds gathered again, and Kukin said
      with an hysterical laugh:
    

      “Oh, I don’t care. Let it do its worst. Let it drown the whole
      theatre, and me, too. All right, no luck for me in this world or the next.
      Let the actors bring suit against me and drag me to court. What’s
      the court? Why not Siberia at hard labour, or even the scaffold? Ha, ha,
      ha!”
    

      It was the same on the third day.
    

      Olenka listened to Kukin seriously, in silence. Sometimes tears would rise
      to her eyes. At last Kukin’s misfortune touched her. She fell in
      love with him. He was short, gaunt, with a yellow face, and curly hair
      combed back from his forehead, and a thin tenor voice. His features
      puckered all up when he spoke. Despair was ever inscribed on his face. And
      yet he awakened in Olenka a sincere, deep feeling.
    

      She was always loving somebody. She couldn’t get on without loving
      somebody. She had loved her sick father, who sat the whole time in his
      armchair in a darkened room, breathing heavily. She had loved her aunt,
      who came from Brianska once or twice a year to visit them. And before
      that, when a pupil at the progymnasium, she had loved her French teacher.
      She was a quiet, kind-hearted, compassionate girl, with a soft gentle way
      about her. And she made a very healthy, wholesome impression. Looking at
      her full, rosy cheeks, at her soft white neck with the black mole, and at
      the good naÃ¯ve smile that always played on her face when something
      pleasant was said, the men would think, “Not so bad,” and
      would smile too; and the lady visitors, in the middle of the conversation,
      would suddenly grasp her hand and exclaim, “You darling!” in a
      burst of delight.
    

      The house, hers by inheritance, in which she had lived from birth, was
      located at the outskirts of the city on the Gypsy Road, not far from the
      Tivoli. From early evening till late at night she could hear the music in
      the theatre and the bursting of the rockets; and it seemed to her that
      Kukin was roaring and battling with his fate and taking his chief enemy,
      the indifferent public, by assault. Her heart melted softly, she felt no
      desire to sleep, and when Kukin returned home towards morning, she tapped
      on her window-pane, and through the curtains he saw her face and one
      shoulder and the kind smile she gave him.
    

      He proposed to her, and they were married. And when he had a good look of
      her neck and her full vigorous shoulders, he clapped his hands and said:
    

      “You darling!”
    

      He was happy. But it rained on their wedding-day, and the expression of
      despair never left his face.
    

      They got along well together. She sat in the cashier’s box, kept the
      theatre in order, wrote down the expenses, and paid out the salaries. Her
      rosy cheeks, her kind naÃ¯ve smile, like a halo around her face, could be
      seen at the cashier’s window, behind the scenes, and in the cafÃ©.
      She began to tell her friends that the theatre was the greatest, the most
      important, the most essential thing in the world, that it was the only
      place to obtain true enjoyment in and become humanised and educated.
    

      “But do you suppose the public appreciates it?” she asked.
      “What the public wants is the circus. Yesterday Vanichka and I gave
      Faust Burlesqued, and almost all the boxes were empty. If we had
      given some silly nonsense, I assure you, the theatre would have been
      overcrowded. To-morrow we’ll put Orpheus in Hades on. Do
      come.”
    

      Whatever Kukin said about the theatre and the actors, she repeated. She
      spoke, as he did, with contempt of the public, of its indifference to art,
      of its boorishness. She meddled in the rehearsals, corrected the actors,
      watched the conduct of the musicians; and when an unfavourable criticism
      appeared in the local paper, she wept and went to the editor to argue with
      him.
    

      The actors were fond of her and called her “Vanichka and I”
      and “the darling.” She was sorry for them and lent them small
      sums. When they bilked her, she never complained to her husband; at the
      utmost she shed a few tears.
    

      In winter, too, they got along nicely together. They leased a theatre in
      the town for the whole winter and sublet it for short periods to a Little
      Russian theatrical company, to a conjuror and to the local amateur
      players.
    

      Olenka grew fuller and was always beaming with contentment; while Kukin
      grew thinner and yellower and complained of his terrible losses, though he
      did fairly well the whole winter. At night he coughed, and she gave him
      raspberry syrup and lime water, rubbed him with eau de Cologne, and
      wrapped him up in soft coverings.
    

      “You are my precious sweet,” she said with perfect sincerity,
      stroking his hair. “You are such a dear.”
    

      At Lent he went to Moscow to get his company together, and, while without
      him, Olenka was unable to sleep. She sat at the window the whole time,
      gazing at the stars. She likened herself to the hens that are also uneasy
      and unable to sleep when their rooster is out of the coop. Kukin was
      detained in Moscow. He wrote he would be back during Easter Week, and in
      his letters discussed arrangements already for the Tivoli. But late one
      night, before Easter Monday, there was an ill-omened knocking at the
      wicket-gate. It was like a knocking on a barrel—boom, boom, boom!
      The sleepy cook ran barefooted, plashing through the puddles, to open the
      gate.
    

      “Open the gate, please,” said some one in a hollow bass voice.
      “I have a telegram for you.”
    

      Olenka had received telegrams from her husband before; but this time,
      somehow, she was numbed with terror. She opened the telegram with
      trembling hands and read:
    

      “Ivan Petrovich died suddenly to-day. Awaiting propt orders for
      wuneral Tuesday.”
    

      That was the way the telegram was written—“wuneral”—and
      another unintelligible word—“propt.” The telegram was
      signed by the manager of the opera company.
    

      “My dearest!” Olenka burst out sobbing. “Vanichka, my
      dearest, my sweetheart. Why did I ever meet you? Why did I ever get to
      know you and love you? To whom have you abandoned your poor Olenka, your
      poor, unhappy Olenka?”
    

      Kukin was buried on Tuesday in the Vagankov Cemetery in Moscow. Olenka
      returned home on Wednesday; and as soon as she entered her house she threw
      herself on her bed and broke into such loud sobbing that she could be
      heard in the street and in the neighbouring yards.
    

      “The darling!” said the neighbours, crossing themselves.
      “How Olga Semyonovna, the poor darling, is grieving!”
    

      Three months afterwards Olenka was returning home from mass, downhearted
      and in deep mourning. Beside her walked a man also returning from church,
      Vasily Pustovalov, the manager of the merchant Babakayev’s
      lumber-yard. He was wearing a straw hat, a white vest with a gold chain,
      and looked more like a landowner than a business man.
    

      “Everything has its ordained course, Olga Semyonovna,” he said
      sedately, with sympathy in his voice. “And if any one near and dear
      to us dies, then it means it was God’s will and we should remember
      that and bear it with submission.”
    

      He took her to the wicket-gate, said good-bye and went away. After that
      she heard his sedate voice the whole day; and on closing her eyes she
      instantly had a vision of his dark beard. She took a great liking to him.
      And evidently he had been impressed by her, too; for, not long after, an
      elderly woman, a distant acquaintance, came in to have a cup of coffee
      with her. As soon as the woman was seated at table she began to speak
      about Pustovalov—how good he was, what a steady man, and any woman
      could be glad to get him as a husband. Three days later Pustovalov himself
      paid Olenka a visit. He stayed only about ten minutes, and spoke little,
      but Olenka fell in love with him, fell in love so desperately that she did
      not sleep the whole night and burned as with fever. In the morning she
      sent for the elderly woman. Soon after, Olenka and Pustovalov were
      engaged, and the wedding followed.
    

      Pustovalov and Olenka lived happily together. He usually stayed in the
      lumber-yard until dinner, then went out on business. In his absence Olenka
      took his place in the office until evening, attending to the book-keeping
      and despatching the orders.
    

      “Lumber rises twenty per cent every year nowadays,” she told
      her customers and acquaintances. “Imagine, we used to buy wood from
      our forests here. Now Vasichka has to go every year to the government of
      Mogilev to get wood. And what a tax!” she exclaimed, covering her
      cheeks with her hands in terror. “What a tax!”
    

      She felt as if she had been dealing in lumber for ever so long, that the
      most important and essential thing in life was lumber. There was something
      touching and endearing in the way she pronounced the words, “beam,”
      “joist,” “plank,” “stave,” “lath,”
      “gun-carriage,” “clamp.” At night she dreamed of
      whole mountains of boards and planks, long, endless rows of wagons
      conveying the wood somewhere, far, far from the city. She dreamed that a
      whole regiment of beams, 36 ft. x 5 in., were advancing in an upright
      position to do battle against the lumber-yard; that the beams and joists
      and clamps were knocking against each other, emitting the sharp crackling
      reports of dry wood, that they were all falling and then rising again,
      piling on top of each other. Olenka cried out in her sleep, and Pustovalov
      said to her gently:
    

      “Olenka my dear, what is the matter? Cross yourself.”
    

      Her husband’s opinions were all hers. If he thought the room was too
      hot, she thought so too. If he thought business was dull, she thought
      business was dull. Pustovalov was not fond of amusements and stayed home
      on holidays; she did the same.
    

      “You are always either at home or in the office,” said her
      friends. “Why don’t you go to the theatre or to the circus,
      darling?”
    

      “Vasichka and I never go to the theatre,” she answered
      sedately. “We have work to do, we have no time for nonsense. What
      does one get out of going to theatre?”
    

      On Saturdays she and Pustovalov went to vespers, and on holidays to early
      mass. On returning home they walked side by side with rapt faces, an
      agreeable smell emanating from both of them and her silk dress rustling
      pleasantly. At home they drank tea with milk-bread and various jams, and
      then ate pie. Every day at noontime there was an appetising odour in the
      yard and outside the gate of cabbage soup, roast mutton, or duck; and, on
      fast days, of fish. You couldn’t pass the gate without being seized
      by an acute desire to eat. The samovar was always boiling on the office
      table, and customers were treated to tea and biscuits. Once a week the
      married couple went to the baths and returned with red faces, walking side
      by side.
    

      “We are getting along very well, thank God,” said Olenka to
      her friends. “God grant that all should live as well as Vasichka and
      I.”
    

      When Pustovalov went to the government of Mogilev to buy wood, she was
      dreadfully homesick for him, did not sleep nights, and cried. Sometimes
      the veterinary surgeon of the regiment, Smirnov, a young man who lodged in
      the wing of her house, came to see her evenings. He related incidents, or
      they played cards together. This distracted her. The most interesting of
      his stories were those of his own life. He was married and had a son; but
      he had separated from his wife because she had deceived him, and now he
      hated her and sent her forty rubles a month for his son’s support.
      Olenka sighed, shook her head, and was sorry for him.
    

      “Well, the Lord keep you,” she said, as she saw him off to the
      door by candlelight. “Thank you for coming to kill time with me. May
      God give you health. Mother in Heaven!” She spoke very sedately,
      very judiciously, imitating her husband. The veterinary surgeon had
      disappeared behind the door when she called out after him: “Do you
      know, Vladimir Platonych, you ought to make up with your wife. Forgive
      her, if only for the sake of your son. The child understands everything,
      you may be sure.”
    

      When Pustovalov returned, she told him in a low voice about the veterinary
      surgeon and his unhappy family life; and they sighed and shook their
      heads, and talked about the boy who must be homesick for his father. Then,
      by a strange association of ideas, they both stopped before the sacred
      images, made genuflections, and prayed to God to send them children.
    

      And so the Pustovalovs lived for full six years, quietly and peaceably, in
      perfect love and harmony. But once in the winter Vasily Andreyich, after
      drinking some hot tea, went out into the lumber-yard without a hat on his
      head, caught a cold and took sick. He was treated by the best physicians,
      but the malady progressed, and he died after an illness of four months.
      Olenka was again left a widow.
    

      “To whom have you left me, my darling?” she wailed after the
      funeral. “How shall I live now without you, wretched creature that I
      am. Pity me, good people, pity me, fatherless and motherless, all alone in
      the world!”
    

      She went about dressed in black and weepers, and she gave up wearing hats
      and gloves for good. She hardly left the house except to go to church and
      to visit her husband’s grave. She almost led the life of a nun.
    

      It was not until six months had passed that she took off the weepers and
      opened her shutters. She began to go out occasionally in the morning to
      market with her cook. But how she lived at home and what went on there,
      could only be surmised. It could be surmised from the fact that she was
      seen in her little garden drinking tea with the veterinarian while he read
      the paper out loud to her, and also from the fact that once on meeting an
      acquaintance at the post-office, she said to her:
    

      “There is no proper veterinary inspection in our town. That is why
      there is so much disease. You constantly hear of people getting sick from
      the milk and becoming infected by the horses and cows. The health of
      domestic animals ought really to be looked after as much as that of human
      beings.”
    

      She repeated the veterinarian’s words and held the same opinions as
      he about everything. It was plain that she could not exist a single year
      without an attachment, and she found her new happiness in the wing of her
      house. In any one else this would have been condemned; but no one could
      think ill of Olenka. Everything in her life was so transparent. She and
      the veterinary surgeon never spoke about the change in their relations.
      They tried, in fact, to conceal it, but unsuccessfully; for Olenka could
      have no secrets. When the surgeon’s colleagues from the regiment
      came to see him, she poured tea, and served the supper, and talked to them
      about the cattle plague, the foot and mouth disease, and the municipal
      slaughter houses. The surgeon was dreadfully embarrassed, and after the
      visitors had left, he caught her hand and hissed angrily:
    

      “Didn’t I ask you not to talk about what you don’t
      understand? When we doctors discuss things, please don’t mix in. It’s
      getting to be a nuisance.”
    

      She looked at him in astonishment and alarm, and asked:
    

      “But, Volodichka, what am I to talk about?”
    

      And she threw her arms round his neck, with tears in her eyes, and begged
      him not to be angry. And they were both happy.
    

      But their happiness was of short duration. The veterinary surgeon went
      away with his regiment to be gone for good, when it was transferred to
      some distant place almost as far as Siberia, and Olenka was left alone.
    

      Now she was completely alone. Her father had long been dead, and his
      armchair lay in the attic covered with dust and minus one leg. She got
      thin and homely, and the people who met her on the street no longer looked
      at her as they had used to, nor smiled at her. Evidently her best years
      were over, past and gone, and a new, dubious life was to begin which it
      were better not to think about.
    

      In the evening Olenka sat on the steps and heard the music playing and the
      rockets bursting in the Tivoli; but it no longer aroused any response in
      her. She looked listlessly into the yard, thought of nothing, wanted
      nothing, and when night came on, she went to bed and dreamed of nothing
      but the empty yard. She ate and drank as though by compulsion.
    

      And what was worst of all, she no longer held any opinions. She saw and
      understood everything that went on around her, but she could not form an
      opinion about it. She knew of nothing to talk about. And how dreadful not
      to have opinions! For instance, you see a bottle, or you see that it is
      raining, or you see a muzhik riding by in a wagon. But what the bottle or
      the rain or the muzhik are for, or what the sense of them all is, you
      cannot tell—you cannot tell, not for a thousand rubles. In the days
      of Kukin and Pustovalov and then of the veterinary surgeon, Olenka had had
      an explanation for everything, and would have given her opinion freely no
      matter about what. But now there was the same emptiness in her heart and
      brain as in her yard. It was as galling and bitter as a taste of wormwood.
    

      Gradually the town grew up all around. The Gypsy Road had become a street,
      and where the Tivoli and the lumber-yard had been, there were now houses
      and a row of side streets. How quickly time flies! Olenka’s house
      turned gloomy, the roof rusty, the shed slanting. Dock and thistles
      overgrew the yard. Olenka herself had aged and grown homely. In the summer
      she sat on the steps, and her soul was empty and dreary and bitter. When
      she caught the breath of spring, or when the wind wafted the chime of the
      cathedral bells, a sudden flood of memories would pour over her, her heart
      would expand with a tender warmth, and the tears would stream down her
      cheeks. But that lasted only a moment. Then would come emptiness again,
      and the feeling, What is the use of living? The black kitten Bryska rubbed
      up against her and purred softly, but the little creature’s caresses
      left Olenka untouched. That was not what she needed. What she needed was a
      love that would absorb her whole being, her reason, her whole soul, that
      would give her ideas, an object in life, that would warm her aging blood.
      And she shook the black kitten off her skirt angrily, saying:
    

      “Go away! What are you doing here?”
    

      And so day after day, year after year not a single joy, not a single
      opinion. Whatever Marva, the cook, said was all right.
    

      One hot day in July, towards evening, as the town cattle were being driven
      by, and the whole yard was filled with clouds of dust, there was suddenly
      a knocking at the gate. Olenka herself went to open it, and was
      dumbfounded to behold the veterinarian Smirnov. He had turned grey and was
      dressed as a civilian. All the old memories flooded into her soul, she
      could not restrain herself, she burst out crying, and laid her head on
      Smirnov’s breast without saying a word. So overcome was she that she
      was totally unconscious of how they walked into the house and seated
      themselves to drink tea.
    

      “My darling!” she murmured, trembling with joy. “Vladimir
      Platonych, from where has God sent you?”
    

      “I want to settle here for good,” he told her. “I have
      resigned my position and have come here to try my fortune as a free man
      and lead a settled life. Besides, it’s time to send my boy to the
      gymnasium. He is grown up now. You know, my wife and I have become
      reconciled.”
    

      “Where is she?” asked Olenka.
    

      “At the hotel with the boy. I am looking for lodgings.”
    

      “Good gracious, bless you, take my house. Why won’t my house
      do? Oh, dear! Why, I won’t ask any rent of you,” Olenka burst
      out in the greatest excitement, and began to cry again. “You live
      here, and the wing will be enough for me. Oh, Heavens, what a joy!”
    

      The very next day the roof was being painted and the walls whitewashed,
      and Olenka, arms akimbo, was going about the yard superintending. Her face
      brightened with her old smile. Her whole being revived and freshened, as
      though she had awakened from a long sleep. The veterinarian’s wife
      and child arrived. She was a thin, plain woman, with a crabbed expression.
      The boy Sasha, small for his ten years of age, was a chubby child, with
      clear blue eyes and dimples in his cheeks. He made for the kitten the
      instant he entered the yard, and the place rang with his happy laughter.
    

      “Is that your cat, auntie?” he asked Olenka. “When she
      has little kitties, please give me one. Mamma is awfully afraid of mice.”
    

      Olenka chatted with him, gave him tea, and there was a sudden warmth in
      her bosom and a soft gripping at her heart, as though the boy were her own
      son.
    

      In the evening, when he sat in the dining-room studying his lessons, she
      looked at him tenderly and whispered to herself:
    

      “My darling, my pretty. You are such a clever child, so good to look
      at.”
    

      “An island is a tract of land entirely surrounded by water,”
      he recited.
    

      “An island is a tract of land,” she repeated—the first
      idea asseverated with conviction after so many years of silence and mental
      emptiness.
    

      She now had her opinions, and at supper discussed with Sasha’s
      parents how difficult the studies had become for the children at the
      gymnasium, but how, after all, a classical education was better than a
      commercial course, because when you graduated from the gymnasium then the
      road was open to you for any career at all. If you chose to, you could
      become a doctor, or, if you wanted to, you could become an engineer.
    

      Sasha began to go to the gymnasium. His mother left on a visit to her
      sister in Kharkov and never came back. The father was away every day
      inspecting cattle, and sometimes was gone three whole days at a time, so
      that Sasha, it seemed to Olenka, was utterly abandoned, was treated as if
      he were quite superfluous, and must be dying of hunger. So she transferred
      him into the wing along with herself and fixed up a little room for him
      there.
    

      Every morning Olenka would come into his room and find him sound asleep
      with his hand tucked under his cheek, so quiet that he seemed not to be
      breathing. What a shame to have to wake him, she thought.
    

      “Sashenka,” she said sorrowingly, “get up, darling. It’s
      time to go to the gymnasium.”
    

      He got up, dressed, said his prayers, then sat down to drink tea. He drank
      three glasses of tea, ate two large cracknels and half a buttered roll.
      The sleep was not yet out of him, so he was a little cross.
    

      “You don’t know your fable as you should, Sashenka,”
      said Olenka, looking at him as though he were departing on a long journey.
      “What a lot of trouble you are. You must try hard and learn, dear,
      and mind your teachers.”
    

      “Oh, let me alone, please,” said Sasha.
    

      Then he went down the street to the gymnasium, a little fellow wearing a
      large cap and carrying a satchel on his back. Olenka followed him
      noiselessly.
    

      “Sashenka,” she called.
    

      He looked round and she shoved a date or a caramel into his hand. When he
      reached the street of the gymnasium, he turned around and said, ashamed of
      being followed by a tall, stout woman:
    

      “You had better go home, aunt. I can go the rest of the way myself.”
    

      She stopped and stared after him until he had disappeared into the school
      entrance.
    

      Oh, how she loved him! Not one of her other ties had been so deep. Never
      before had she given herself so completely, so disinterestedly, so
      cheerfully as now that her maternal instincts were all aroused. For this
      boy, who was not hers, for the dimples in his cheeks and for his big cap,
      she would have given her life, given it with joy and with tears of
      rapture. Why? Ah, indeed, why?
    

      When she had seen Sasha off to the gymnasium, she returned home quietly,
      content, serene, overflowing with love. Her face, which had grown younger
      in the last half year, smiled and beamed. People who met her were pleased
      as they looked at her.
    

      “How are you, Olga Semyonovna, darling? How are you getting on,
      darling?”
    

      “The gymnasium course is very hard nowadays,” she told at the
      market. “It’s no joke. Yesterday the first class had a fable
      to learn by heart, a Latin translation, and a problem. How is a little
      fellow to do all that?”
    

      And she spoke of the teacher and the lessons and the text-books, repeating
      exactly what Sasha said about them.
    

      At three o’clock they had dinner. In the evening they prepared the
      lessons together, and Olenka wept with Sasha over the difficulties. When
      she put him to bed, she lingered a long time making the sign of the cross
      over him and muttering a prayer. And when she lay in bed, she dreamed of
      the far-away, misty future when Sasha would finish his studies and become
      a doctor or an engineer, have a large house of his own, with horses and a
      carriage, marry and have children. She would fall asleep still thinking of
      the same things, and tears would roll down her cheeks from her closed
      eyes. And the black cat would lie at her side purring: “Mrr, mrr,
      mrr.”
    

      Suddenly there was a loud knocking at the gate. Olenka woke up breathless
      with fright, her heart beating violently. Half a minute later there was
      another knock.
    

      “A telegram from Kharkov,” she thought, her whole body in a
      tremble. “His mother wants Sasha to come to her in Kharkov. Oh,
      great God!”
    

      She was in despair. Her head, her feet, her hands turned cold. There was
      no unhappier creature in the world, she felt. But another minute passed,
      she heard voices. It was the veterinarian coming home from the club.
    

      “Thank God,” she thought. The load gradually fell from her
      heart, she was at ease again. And she went back to bed, thinking of Sasha
      who lay fast asleep in the next room and sometimes cried out in his sleep:
    

      “I’ll give it to you! Get away! Quit your scrapping!”
    











      THE BET
    

      BY ANTON P. CHEKHOV
    

      I
    

It was a dark
      autumn night. The old banker was pacing from corner to corner of his
      study, recalling to his mind the party he gave in the autumn fifteen years
      before. There were many clever people at the party and much interesting
      conversation. They talked among other things of capital punishment. The
      guests, among them not a few scholars and journalists, for the most part
      disapproved of capital punishment. They found it obsolete as a means of
      punishment, unfitted to a Christian State and immoral. Some of them
      thought that capital punishment should be replaced universally by
      life-imprisonment.
    

      “I don’t agree with you,” said the host. “I myself
      have experienced neither capital punishment nor life-imprisonment, but if
      one may judge a priori, then in my opinion capital punishment is
      more moral and more humane than imprisonment. Execution kills instantly,
      life-imprisonment kills by degrees. Who is the more humane executioner,
      one who kills you in a few seconds or one who draws the life out of you
      incessantly, for years?”
    

      “They’re both equally immoral,” remarked one of the
      guests, “because their purpose is the same, to take away life. The
      State is not God. It has no right to take away that which it cannot give
      back, if it should so desire.”
    

      Among the company was a lawyer, a young man of about twenty-five. On being
      asked his opinion, he said:
    

      “Capital punishment and life-imprisonment are equally immoral; but
      if I were offered the choice between them, I would certainly choose the
      second. It’s better to live somehow than not to live at all.”
    

      There ensued a lively discussion. The banker who was then younger and more
      nervous suddenly lost his temper, banged his fist on the table, and
      turning to the young lawyer, cried out:
    

      “It’s a lie. I bet you two millions you wouldn’t stick
      in a cell even for five years.”
    

      “If you mean it seriously,” replied the lawyer, “then I
      bet I’ll stay not five but fifteen.”
    

      “Fifteen! Done!” cried the banker. “Gentlemen, I stake
      two millions.”
    

      “Agreed. You stake two millions, I my freedom,” said the
      lawyer.
    

      So this wild, ridiculous bet came to pass. The banker, who at that time
      had too many millions to count, spoiled and capricious, was beside himself
      with rapture. During supper he said to the lawyer jokingly:
    

      “Come to your senses, young roan, before it’s too late. Two
      millions are nothing to me, but you stand to lose three or four of the
      best years of your life. I say three or four, because you’ll never
      stick it out any longer. Don’t forget either, you unhappy man, that
      voluntary is much heavier than enforced imprisonment. The idea that you
      have the right to free yourself at any moment will poison the whole of
      your life in the cell. I pity you.”
    

      And now the banker, pacing from corner to corner, recalled all this and
      asked himself:
    

      “Why did I make this bet? What’s the good? The lawyer loses
      fifteen years of his life and I throw away two millions. Will it convince
      people that capital punishment is worse or better than imprisonment for
      life? No, no! all stuff and rubbish. On my part, it was the caprice of a
      well-fed man; on the lawyer’s pure greed of gold.”
    

      He recollected further what happened after the evening party. It was
      decided that the lawyer must undergo his imprisonment under the strictest
      observation, in a garden wing of the banker’s house. It was agreed
      that during the period he would be deprived of the right to cross the
      threshold, to see living people, to hear human voices, and to receive
      letters and newspapers. He was permitted to have a musical instrument, to
      read books, to write letters, to drink wine and smoke tobacco. By the
      agreement he could communicate, but only in silence, with the outside
      world through a little window specially constructed for this purpose.
      Everything necessary, books, music, wine, he could receive in any quantity
      by sending a note through the window. The agreement provided for all the
      minutest details, which made the confinement strictly solitary, and it
      obliged the lawyer to remain exactly fifteen years from twelve o’clock
      of November 14th, 1870, to twelve o’clock of November 14th, 1885.
      The least attempt on his part to violate the conditions, to escape if only
      for two minutes before the time freed the banker from the obligation to
      pay him the two millions.
    

      During the first year of imprisonment, the lawyer, as far as it was
      possible to judge from his short notes, suffered terribly from loneliness
      and boredom. From his wing day and night came the sound of the piano. He
      rejected wine and tobacco. “Wine,” he wrote, “excites
      desires, and desires are the chief foes of a prisoner; besides, nothing is
      more boring than to drink good wine alone,” and tobacco spoils the
      air in his room. During the first year the lawyer was sent books of a
      light character; novels with a complicated love interest, stories of crime
      and fantasy, comedies, and so on.
    

      In the second year the piano was heard no longer and the lawyer asked only
      for classics. In the fifth year, music was heard again, and the prisoner
      asked for wine. Those who watched him said that during the whole of that
      year he was only eating, drinking, and lying on his bed. He yawned often
      and talked angrily to himself. Books he did not read. Sometimes at nights
      he would sit down to write. He would write for a long time and tear it all
      up in the morning. More than once he was heard to weep.
    

      In the second half of the sixth year, the prisoner began zealously to
      study languages, philosophy, and history. He fell on these subjects so
      hungrily that the banker hardly had time to get books enough for him. In
      the space of four years about six hundred volumes were bought at his
      request. It was while that passion lasted that the banker received the
      following letter from the prisoner: “My dear gaoler, I am writing
      these lines in six languages. Show them to experts. Let them read them. If
      they do not find one single mistake, I beg you to give orders to have a
      gun fired off in the garden. By the noise I shall know that my efforts
      have not been in vain. The geniuses of all ages and countries speak in
      different languages; but in them all burns the same flame. Oh, if you knew
      my heavenly happiness now that I can understand them!” The prisoner’s
      desire was fulfilled. Two shots were fired in the garden by the banker’s
      order.
    

      Later on, after the tenth year, the lawyer sat immovable before his table
      and read only the New Testament. The banker found it strange that a man
      who in four years had mastered six hundred erudite volumes, should have
      spent nearly a year in reading one book, easy to understand and by no
      means thick. The New Testament was then replaced by the history of
      religions and theology.
    

      During the last two years of his confinement the prisoner read an
      extraordinary amount, quite haphazard. Now he would apply himself to the
      natural sciences, then he would read Byron or Shakespeare. Notes used to
      come from him in which he asked to be sent at the same time a book on
      chemistry, a text-book of medicine, a novel, and some treatise on
      philosophy or theology. He read as though he were swimming in the sea
      among broken pieces of wreckage, and in his desire to save his life was
      eagerly grasping one piece after another.
    

      II
    

The banker recalled
      all this, and thought:
    

      “To-morrow at twelve o’clock he receives his freedom. Under
      the agreement, I shall have to pay him two millions. If I pay, it’s
      all over with me. I am ruined for ever ...”
    

      Fifteen years before he had too many millions to count, but now he was
      afraid to ask himself which he had more of, money or debts. Gambling on
      the Stock-Exchange, risky speculation, and the recklessness of which he
      could not rid himself even in old age, had gradually brought his business
      to decay; and the fearless, self-confident, proud man of business had
      become an ordinary banker, trembling at every rise and fall in the market.
    

      “That cursed bet,” murmured the old man clutching his head in
      despair... “Why didn’t the man die? He’s only forty
      years old. He will take away my last farthing, marry, enjoy life, gamble
      on the Exchange, and I will look on like an envious beggar and hear the
      same words from him every day: ‘I’m obliged to you for the
      happiness of my life. Let me help you.’ No, it’s too much! The
      only escape from bankruptcy and disgrace—is that the man should die.”
    

      The clock had just struck three. The banker was listening. In the house
      every one was asleep, and one could hear only the frozen trees whining
      outside the windows. Trying to make no sound, he took out of his safe the
      key of the door which had not been opened for fifteen years, put on his
      overcoat, and went out of the house. The garden was dark and cold. It was
      raining. A damp, penetrating wind howled in the garden and gave the trees
      no rest. Though he strained his eyes, the banker could see neither the
      ground, nor the white statues, nor the garden wing, nor the trees.
      Approaching the garden wing, he called the watchman twice. There was no
      answer. Evidently the watchman had taken shelter from the bad weather and
      was now asleep somewhere in the kitchen or the greenhouse.
    

      “If I have the courage to fulfil my intention,” thought the
      old man, “the suspicion will fall on the watchman first of all.”
    

      In the darkness he groped for the steps and the door and entered the hall
      of the garden-wing, then poked his way into a narrow passage and struck a
      match. Not a soul was there. Some one’s bed, with no bedclothes on
      it, stood there, and an iron stove loomed dark in the corner. The seals on
      the door that led into the prisoner’s room were unbroken.
    

      When the match went out, the old man, trembling from agitation, peeped
      into the little window.
    

      In the prisoner’s room a candle was burning dimly. The prisoner
      himself sat by the table. Only his back, the hair on his head and his
      hands were visible. Open books were strewn about on the table, the two
      chairs, and on the carpet near the table.
    

      Five minutes passed and the prisoner never once stirred. Fifteen years’
      confinement had taught him to sit motionless. The banker tapped on the
      window with his finger, but the prisoner made no movement in reply. Then
      the banker cautiously tore the seals from the door and put the key into
      the lock. The rusty lock gave a hoarse groan and the door creaked. The
      banker expected instantly to hear a cry of surprise and the sound of
      steps. Three minutes passed and it was as quiet inside as it had been
      before. He made up his mind to enter.
    

      Before the table sat a man, unlike an ordinary human being. It was a
      skeleton, with tight-drawn skin, with long curly hair like a woman’s,
      and a shaggy beard. The colour of his face was yellow, of an earthy shade;
      the cheeks were sunken, the back long and narrow, and the hand upon which
      he leaned his hairy head was so lean and skinny that it was painful to
      look upon. His hair was already silvering with grey, and no one who
      glanced at the senile emaciation of the face would have believed that he
      was only forty years old. On the table, before his bended head, lay a
      sheet of paper on which something was written in a tiny hand.
    

      “Poor devil,” thought the banker, “he’s asleep and
      probably seeing millions in his dreams. I have only to take and throw this
      half-dead thing on the bed, smother him a moment with the pillow, and the
      most careful examination will find no trace of unnatural death. But,
      first, let us read what he has written here.”
    

      The banker took the sheet from the table and read:
    

      “To-morrow at twelve o’clock midnight, I shall obtain my
      freedom and the right to mix with people. But before I leave this room and
      see the sun I think it necessary to say a few words to you. On my own
      clear conscience and before God who sees me I declare to you that I
      despise freedom, life, health, and all that your books call the blessings
      of the world.
    

      “For fifteen years I have diligently studied earthly life. True, I
      saw neither the earth nor the people, but in your books I drank fragrant
      wine, sang songs, hunted deer and wild boar in the forests, loved women...
      And beautiful women, like clouds ethereal, created by the magic of your
      poets’ genius, visited me by night and whispered to me wonderful
      tales, which made my head drunken. In your books I climbed the summits of
      Elbruz and Mont Blanc and saw from there how the sun rose in the morning,
      and in the evening suffused the sky, the ocean and the mountain ridges
      with a purple gold. I saw from there how above me lightnings glimmered
      cleaving the clouds; I saw green forests, fields, rivers, lakes, cities; I
      heard syrens singing, and the playing of the pipes of Pan; I touched the
      wings of beautiful devils who came flying to me to speak of God... In your
      books I cast myself into bottomless abysses, worked miracles, burned
      cities to the ground, preached new religions, conquered whole countries...
    

      “Your books gave me wisdom. All that unwearying human thought
      created in the centuries is compressed to a little lump in my skull. I
      know that I am cleverer than you all.
    

      “And I despise your books, despise all worldly blessings and wisdom.
      Everything is void, frail, visionary and delusive as a mirage. Though you
      be proud and wise and beautiful, yet will death wipe you from the face of
      the earth like the mice underground; and your posterity, your history, and
      the immortality of your men of genius will be as frozen slag, burnt down
      together with the terrestrial globe.
    

      “You are mad, and gone the wrong way. You take falsehood for truth
      and ugliness for beauty. You would marvel if suddenly apple and orange
      trees should bear frogs and lizards instead of fruit, and if roses should
      begin to breathe the odour of a sweating horse. So do I marvel at you, who
      have bartered heaven for earth. I do not want to understand you.
    

      “That I may show you in deed my contempt for that by which you live,
      I waive the two millions of which I once dreamed as of paradise, and which
      I now despise. That I may deprive myself of my right to them, I shall come
      out from here five minutes before the stipulated term, and thus shall
      violate the agreement.”
    

      When he had read, the banker put the sheet on the table, kissed the head
      of the strange man, and began to weep. He went out of the wing. Never at
      any other time, not even after his terrible losses on the Exchange, had he
      felt such contempt for himself as now. Coming home, he lay down on his
      bed, but agitation and tears kept him a long time from sleeping...
    

      The next morning the poor watchman came running to him and told him that
      they had seen the man who lived in the wing climb through the window into
      the garden. He had gone to the gate and disappeared. The banker instantly
      went with his servants to the wing and established the escape of his
      prisoner. To avoid unnecessary rumours he took the paper with the
      renunciation from the table and, on his return, locked it in his safe.
    











      VANKA
    

      BY ANTON P. CHEKHOV
    

Nine-year-old Vanka
      Zhukov, who had been apprentice to the shoemaker Aliakhin for three
      months, did not go to bed the night before Christmas. He waited till the
      master and mistress and the assistants had gone out to an early
      church-service, to procure from his employer’s cupboard a small
      phial of ink and a penholder with a rusty nib; then, spreading a crumpled
      sheet of paper in front of him, he began to write.
    

      Before, however, deciding to make the first letter, he looked furtively at
      the door and at the window, glanced several times at the sombre ikon, on
      either side of which stretched shelves full of lasts, and heaved a
      heart-rending sigh. The sheet of paper was spread on a bench, and he
      himself was on his knees in front of it.
    

      “Dear Grandfather Konstantin Makarych,” he wrote, “I am
      writing you a letter. I wish you a Happy Christmas and all God’s
      holy best. I have no mamma or papa, you are all I have.”
    

      Vanka gave a look towards the window in which shone the reflection of his
      candle, and vividly pictured to himself his grandfather, Konstantin
      Makarych, who was night-watchman at Messrs. Zhivarev. He was a small,
      lean, unusually lively and active old man of sixty-five, always smiling
      and blear-eyed. All day he slept in the servants’ kitchen or trifled
      with the cooks. At night, enveloped in an ample sheep-skin coat, he
      strayed round the domain tapping with his cudgel. Behind him, each hanging
      its head, walked the old bitch Kashtanka, and the dog Viun, so named
      because of his black coat and long body and his resemblance to a loach.
      Viun was an unusually civil and friendly dog, looking as kindly at a
      stranger as at his masters, but he was not to be trusted. Beneath his
      deference and humbleness was hid the most inquisitorial maliciousness. No
      one knew better than he how to sneak up and take a bite at a leg, or slip
      into the larder or steal a muzhik’s chicken. More than once they had
      nearly broken his hind-legs, twice he had been hung up, every week he was
      nearly flogged to death, but he always recovered.
    

      At this moment, for certain, Vanka’s grandfather must be standing at
      the gate, bFlinking his eyes at the bright red windows of the village
      church, stamping his feet in their high-felt boots, and jesting with the
      people in the yard; his cudgel will be hanging from his belt, he will be
      hugging himself with cold, giving a little dry, old man’s cough, and
      at times pinching a servant-girl or a cook.
    

      “Won’t we take some snuff?” he asks, holding out his
      snuff-box to the women. The women take a pinch of snuff, and sneeze.
    

      The old man goes into indescribable ecstasies, breaks into loud laughter,
      and cries:
    

      “Off with it, it will freeze to your nose!”
    

      He gives his snuff to the dogs, too. Kashtanka sneezes, twitches her nose,
      and walks away offended. Viun deferentially refuses to sniff and wags his
      tail. It is glorious weather, not a breath of wind, clear, and frosty; it
      is a dark night, but the whole village, its white roofs and streaks of
      smoke from the chimneys, the trees silvered with hoar-frost, and the
      snowdrifts, you can see it all. The sky scintillates with bright twinkling
      stars, and the Milky Way stands out so clearly that it looks as if it had
      been polished and rubbed over with snow for the holidays...
    

      Vanka sighs, dips his pen in the ink, and continues to write:
    

      “Last night I got a thrashing, my master dragged me by my hair into
      the yard, and belaboured me with a shoe-maker’s stirrup, because,
      while I was rocking his brat in its cradle, I unfortunately fell asleep.
      And during the week, my mistress told me to clean a herring, and I began
      by its tail, so she took the herring and stuck its snout into my face. The
      assistants tease me, send me to the tavern for vodka, make me steal the
      master’s cucumbers, and the master beats me with whatever is handy.
      Food there is none; in the morning it’s bread, at dinner gruel, and
      in the evening bread again. As for tea or sour-cabbage soup, the master
      and the mistress themselves guzzle that. They make me sleep in the
      vestibule, and when their brat cries, I don’t sleep at all, but have
      to rock the cradle. Dear Grandpapa, for Heaven’s sake, take me away
      from here, home to our village, I can’t bear this any more... I bow
      to the ground to you, and will pray to God for ever and ever, take me from
      here or I shall die...”
    

      The corners of Vanka’s mouth went down, he rubbed his eyes with his
      dirty fist, and sobbed.
    

      “I’ll grate your tobacco for you,” he continued, “I’ll
      pray to God for you, and if there is anything wrong, then flog me like the
      grey goat. And if you really think I shan’t find work, then I’ll
      ask the manager, for Christ’s sake, to let me clean the boots, or I’ll
      go instead of Fedya as underherdsman. Dear Grandpapa, I can’t bear
      this any more, it’ll kill me... I wanted to run away to our village,
      but I have no boots, and I was afraid of the frost, and when I grow up I’ll
      look after you, no one shall harm you, and when you die I’ll pray
      for the repose of your soul, just like I do for mamma Pelagueya.
    

      “As for Moscow, it is a large town, there are all gentlemen’s
      houses, lots of horses, no sheep, and the dogs are not vicious. The
      children don’t come round at Christmas with a star, no one is
      allowed to sing in the choir, and once I saw in a shop window hooks on a
      line and fishing rods, all for sale, and for every kind of fish, awfully
      convenient. And there was one hook which would catch a sheat-fish weighing
      a pound. And there are shops with guns, like the master’s, and I am
      sure they must cost 100 rubles each. And in the meat-shops there are
      woodcocks, partridges, and hares, but who shot them or where they come
      from, the shopman won’t say.
    

      “Dear Grandpapa, and when the masters give a Christmas tree, take a
      golden walnut and hide it in my green box. Ask the young lady, Olga
      Ignatyevna, for it, say it’s for Vanka.”
    

      Vanka sighed convulsively, and again stared at the window. He remembered
      that his grandfather always went to the forest for the Christmas tree, and
      took his grandson with him. What happy times! The frost crackled, his
      grandfather crackled, and as they both did, Vanka did the same. Then
      before cutting down the Christmas tree his grandfather smoked his pipe,
      took a long pinch of snuff, and made fun of poor frozen little Vanka...
      The young fir trees, wrapt in hoar-frost, stood motionless, waiting for
      which of them would die. Suddenly a hare springing from somewhere would
      dart over the snowdrift... His grandfather could not help shouting:
    

      “Catch it, catch it, catch it! Ah, short-tailed devil!”
    

      When the tree was down, his grandfather dragged it to the master’s
      house, and there they set about decorating it. The young lady, Olga
      Ignatyevna, Vanka’s great friend, busied herself most about it. When
      little Vanka’s mother, Pelagueya, was still alive, and was
      servant-woman in the house, Olga Ignatyevna used to stuff him with
      sugar-candy, and, having nothing to do, taught him to read, write, count
      up to one hundred, and even to dance the quadrille. When Pelagueya died,
      they placed the orphan Vanka in the kitchen with his grandfather, and from
      the kitchen he was sent to Moscow to Aliakhin, the shoemaker.
    

      “Come quick, dear Grandpapa,” continued Vanka, “I
      beseech you for Christ’s sake take me from here. Have pity on a poor
      orphan, for here they beat me, and I am frightfully hungry, and so sad
      that I can’t tell you, I cry all the time. The other day the master
      hit me on the head with a last; I fell to the ground, and only just
      returned to life. My life is a misfortune, worse than any dog’s... I
      send greetings to Aliona, to one-eyed Tegor, and the coachman, and don’t
      let any one have my mouth-organ. I remain, your grandson, Ivan Zhukov,
      dear Grandpapa, do come.”
    

      Vanka folded his sheet of paper in four, and put it into an envelope
      purchased the night before for a kopek. He thought a little, dipped the
      pen into the ink, and wrote the address:
    

      “The village, to my grandfather.” He then scratched his head,
      thought again, and added: “Konstantin Makarych.” Pleased at
      not having been interfered with in his writing, he put on his cap, and,
      without putting on his sheep-skin coat, ran out in his shirt-sleeves into
      the street.
    

      The shopman at the poulterer’s, from whom he had inquired the night
      before, had told him that letters were to be put into post-boxes, and from
      there they were conveyed over the whole earth in mail troikas by drunken
      post-boys and to the sound of bells. Vanka ran to the first post-box and
      slipped his precious letter into the slit.
    

      An hour afterwards, lulled by hope, he was sleeping soundly. In his dreams
      he saw a stove, by the stove his grandfather sitting with his legs
      dangling down, barefooted, and reading a letter to the cooks, and Viun
      walking round the stove wagging his tail.
    











      HIDE AND SEEK
    

      BY FIODOR SOLOGUB
    

Everything in
      Lelechka’s nursery was bright, pretty, and cheerful. Lelechka’s
      sweet voice charmed her mother. Lelechka was a delightful child. There was
      no other such child, there never had been, and there never would be.
      Lelechka’s mother, Serafima Aleksandrovna, was sure of that.
      Lelechka’s eyes were dark and large, her cheeks were rosy, her lips
      were made for kisses and for laughter. But it was not these charms in
      Lelechka that gave her mother the keenest joy. Lelechka was her mother’s
      only child. That was why every movement of Lelechka’s bewitched her
      mother. It was great bliss to hold Lelechka on her knees and to fondle
      her; to feel the little girl in her arms—a thing as lively and as
      bright as a little bird.
    

      To tell the truth, Serafima Aleksandrovna felt happy only in the nursery.
      She felt cold with her husband.
    

      Perhaps it was because he himself loved the cold—he loved to drink
      cold water, and to breathe cold air. He was always fresh and cool, with a
      frigid smile, and wherever he passed cold currents seemed to move in the
      air.
    

      The Nesletyevs, Sergey Modestovich and Serafima Aleksandrovna, had married
      without love or calculation, because it was the accepted thing. He was a
      young man of thirty-five, she a young woman of twenty-five; both were of
      the same circle and well brought up; he was expected to take a wife, and
      the time had come for her to take a husband.
    

      It even seemed to Serafima Aleksandrovna that she was in love with her
      future husband, and this made her happy. He looked handsome and well-bred;
      his intelligent grey eyes always preserved a dignified expression; and he
      fulfilled his obligations of a fiancÃ© with irreproachable gentleness.
    

      The bride was also good-looking; she was a tall, dark-eyed, dark-haired
      girl, somewhat timid but very tactful. He was not after her dowry, though
      it pleased him to know that she had something. He had connexions, and his
      wife came of good, influential people. This might, at the proper
      opportunity, prove useful. Always irreproachable and tactful, Nesletyev
      got on in his position not so fast that any one should envy him, nor yet
      so slow that he should envy any one else—everything came in the
      proper measure and at the proper time.
    

      After their marriage there was nothing in the manner of Sergey Modestovich
      to suggest anything wrong to his wife. Later, however, when his wife was
      about to have a child, Sergey Modestovich established connexions elsewhere
      of a light and temporary nature. Serafima Aleksandrovna found this out,
      and, to her own astonishment, was not particularly hurt; she awaited her
      infant with a restless anticipation that swallowed every other feeling.
    

      A little girl was born; Serafima Aleksandrovna gave herself up to her. At
      the beginning she used to tell her husband, with rapture, of all the
      joyous details of Lelechka’s existence. But she soon found that he
      listened to her without the slightest interest, and only from the habit of
      politeness. Serafima Aleksandrovna drifted farther and farther away from
      him. She loved her little girl with the ungratified passion that other
      women, deceived in their husbands, show their chance young lovers.
    

      “Mamochka, let’s play priatki” (hide and
      seek), cried Lelechka, pronouncing the r like the l, so that
      the word sounded “pliatki.”
    

      This charming inability to speak always made Serafima Aleksandrovna smile
      with tender rapture. Lelechka then ran away, stamping with her plump
      little legs over the carpets, and hid herself behind the curtains near her
      bed.
    

      “Tiu-tiu, mamochka!” she cried out in her sweet,
      laughing voice, as she looked out with a single roguish eye.
    

      “Where is my baby girl?” the mother asked, as she looked for
      Lelechka and made believe that she did not see her.
    

      And Lelechka poured out her rippling laughter in her hiding place. Then
      she came out a little farther, and her mother, as though she had only just
      caught sight of her, seized her by her little shoulders and exclaimed
      joyously: “Here she is, my Lelechka!”
    

      Lelechka laughed long and merrily, her head close to her mother’s
      knees, and all of her cuddled up between her mother’s white hands.
      Her mother’s eyes glowed with passionate emotion.
    

      “Now, mamochka, you hide,” said Lelechka, as she ceased
      laughing.
    

      Her mother went to hide. Lelechka turned away as though not to see, but
      watched her mamochka stealthily all the time. Mamma hid behind the
      cupboard, and exclaimed: “Tiu-tiu, baby girl!”
    

      Lelechka ran round the room and looked into all the corners, making
      believe, as her mother had done before, that she was seeking—though
      she really knew all the time where her mamochka was standing.
    

      “Where’s my mamochka?” asked Lelechka. “She’s
      not here, and she’s not here,” she kept on repeating, as she
      ran from corner to corner.
    

      Her mother stood, with suppressed breathing, her head pressed against the
      wall, her hair somewhat disarranged. A smile of absolute bliss played on
      her red lips.
    

      The nurse, Fedosya, a good-natured and fine-looking, if somewhat stupid
      woman, smiled as she looked at her mistress with her characteristic
      expression, which seemed to say that it was not for her to object to
      gentlewomen’s caprices. She thought to herself: “The mother is
      like a little child herself—look how excited she is.”
    

      Lelechka was getting nearer her mother’s corner. Her mother was
      growing more absorbed every moment by her interest in the game; her heart
      beat with short quick strokes, and she pressed even closer to the wall,
      disarranging her hair still more. Lelechka suddenly glanced toward her
      mother’s corner and screamed with joy.
    

      “I’ve found ‘oo,” she cried out loudly and
      joyously, mispronouncing her words in a way that again made her mother
      happy.
    

      She pulled her mother by her hands to the middle of the room, they were
      merry and they laughed; and Lelechka again hid her head against her mother’s
      knees, and went on lisping and lisping, without end, her sweet little
      words, so fascinating yet so awkward.
    

      Sergey Modestovich was coming at this moment toward the nursery. Through
      the half-closed doors he heard the laughter, the joyous outcries, the
      sound of romping. He entered the nursery, smiling his genial cold smile;
      he was irreproachably dressed, and he looked fresh and erect, and he
      spread round him an atmosphere of cleanliness, freshness and coldness. He
      entered in the midst of the lively game, and he confused them all by his
      radiant coldness. Even Fedosya felt abashed, now for her mistress, now for
      herself. Serafima Aleksandrovna at once became calm and apparently cold—and
      this mood communicated itself to the little girl, who ceased to laugh, but
      looked instead, silently and intently, at her father.
    

      Sergey Modestovich gave a swift glance round the room. He liked coming
      here, where everything was beautifully arranged; this was done by Serafima
      Aleksandrovna, who wished to surround her little girl, from her very
      infancy, only with the loveliest things. Serafima Aleksandrovna dressed
      herself tastefully; this, too, she did for Lelechka, with the same end in
      view. One thing Sergey Modestovich had not become reconciled to, and this
      was his wife’s almost continuous presence in the nursery.
    

      “It’s just as I thought... I knew that I’d find you
      here,” he said with a derisive and condescending smile.
    

      They left the nursery together. As he followed his wife through the door
      Sergey Modestovich said rather indifferently, in an incidental way, laying
      no stress on his words: “Don’t you think that it would be well
      for the little girl if she were sometimes without your company? Merely,
      you see, that the child should feel its own individuality,” he
      explained in answer to Serafima Aleksandrovna’s puzzled glance.
    

      “She’s still so little,” said Serafima Aleksandrovna.
    

      “In any case, this is but my humble opinion. I don’t insist.
      It’s your kingdom there.”
    

      “I’ll think it over,” his wife answered, smiling, as he
      did, coldly but genially.
    

      Then they began to talk of something else.
    

      II
    

Nurse Fedosya,
      sitting in the kitchen that evening, was telling the silent housemaid
      Darya and the talkative old cook Agathya about the young lady of the
      house, and how the child loved to play priatki with her mother—“She
      hides her little face, and cries ‘tiutiu’!”
    

      “And the mistress herself is like a little one,” added
      Fedosya, smiling.
    

      Agathya listened and shook her head ominously; while her face became grave
      and reproachful.
    

      “That the mistress does it, well, that’s one thing; but that
      the young lady does it, that’s bad.”
    

      “Why?” asked Fedosya with curiosity.
    

      This expression of curiosity gave her face the look of a wooden,
      roughly-painted doll.
    

      “Yes, that’s bad,” repeated Agathya with conviction.
      “Terribly bad!”
    

      “Well?” said Fedosya, the ludicrous expression of curiosity on
      her face becoming more emphatic.
    

      “She’ll hide, and hide, and hide away,” said Agathya, in
      a mysterious whisper, as she looked cautiously toward the door.
    

      “What are you saying?” exclaimed Fedosya, frightened.
    

      “It’s the truth I’m saying, remember my words,”
      Agathya went on with the same assurance and secrecy. “It’s the
      surest sign.”
    

      The old woman had invented this sign, quite suddenly, herself; and she was
      evidently very proud of it.
    

      III
    

Lelechka was
      asleep, and Serafima Aleksandrovna was sitting in her own room, thinking
      with joy and tenderness of Lelechka. Lelechka was in her thoughts, first a
      sweet, tiny girl, then a sweet, big girl, then again a delightful little
      girl; and so until the end she remained mamma’s little Lelechka.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna did not even notice that Fedosya came up to her and
      paused before her. Fedosya had a worried, frightened look.
    

      “Madam, madam,” she said quietly, in a trembling voice.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna gave a start. Fedosya’s face made her
      anxious.
    

      “What is it, Fedosya?” she asked with great concern. “Is
      there anything wrong with Lelechka?”
    

      “No, madam,” said Fedosya, as she gesticulated with her hands
      to reassure her mistress and to make her sit down. “Lelechka is
      asleep, may God be with her! Only I’d like to say something—you
      see—Lelechka is always hiding herself—that’s not good.”
    

      Fedosya looked at her mistress with fixed eyes, which had grown round from
      fright.
    

      “Why not good?” asked Serafima Aleksandrovna, with vexation,
      succumbing involuntarily to vague fears.
    

      “I can’t tell you how bad it is,” said Fedosya, and her
      face expressed the most decided confidence.
    

      “Please speak in a sensible way,” observed Serafima
      Aleksandrovna dryly. “I understand nothing of what you are saying.”
    

      “You see, madam, it’s a kind of omen,” explained Fedosya
      abruptly, in a shamefaced way.
    

      “Nonsense!” said Serafima Aleksandrovna.
    

      She did not wish to hear any further as to the sort of omen it was, and
      what it foreboded. But, somehow, a sense of fear and of sadness crept into
      her mood, and it was humiliating to feel that an absurd tale should
      disturb her beloved fancies, and should agitate her so deeply.
    

      “Of course I know that gentlefolk don’t believe in omens, but
      it’s a bad omen, madam,” Fedosya went on in a doleful voice,
      “the young lady will hide, and hide...”
    

      Suddenly she burst into tears, sobbing out loudly: “She’ll
      hide, and hide, and hide away, angelic little soul, in a damp grave,”
      she continued, as she wiped her tears with her apron and blew her nose.
    

      “Who told you all this?” asked Serafima Aleksandrovna in an
      austere low voice.
    

      “Agathya says so, madam,” answered Fedosya; “it’s
      she that knows.”
    

      “Knows!” exclaimed Serafima Aleksandrovna in irritation, as
      though she wished to protect herself somehow from this sudden anxiety.
      “What nonsense! Please don’t come to me with any such notions
      in the future. Now you may go.”
    

      Fedosya, dejected, her feelings hurt, left her mistress.
    

      “What nonsense! As though Lelechka could die!” thought
      Serafima Aleksandrovna to herself, trying to conquer the feeling of
      coldness and fear which took possession, of her at the thought of the
      possible death of Lelechka. Serafima Aleksandrovna, upon reflection,
      attributed these women’s beliefs in omens to ignorance. She saw
      clearly that there could be no possible connexion between a child’s
      quite ordinary diversion and the continuation of the child’s life.
      She made a special effort that evening to occupy her mind with other
      matters, but her thoughts returned involuntarily to the fact that Lelechka
      loved to hide herself.
    

      When Lelechka was still quite small, and had learned to distinguish
      between her mother and her nurse, she sometimes, sitting in her nurse’s
      arms, made a sudden roguish grimace, and hid her laughing face in the
      nurse’s shoulder. Then she would look out with a sly glance.
    

      Of late, in those rare moments of the mistress’ absence from the
      nursery, Fedosya had again taught Lelechka to hide; and when Lelechka’s
      mother, on coming in, saw how lovely the child looked when she was hiding,
      she herself began to play hide and seek with her tiny daughter.
    

      IV
    

The next day
      Serafima Aleksandrovna, absorbed in her joyous cares for Lelechka, had
      forgotten Fedosya’s words of the day before.
    

      But when she returned to the nursery, after having ordered the dinner, and
      she heard Lelechka suddenly cry “Tiu-tiu!” from under
      the table, a feeling of fear suddenly took hold of her. Though she
      reproached herself at once for this unfounded, superstitious dread,
      nevertheless she could not enter wholeheartedly into the spirit of
      Lelechka’s favourite game, and she tried to divert Lelechka’s
      attention to something else.
    

      Lelechka was a lovely and obedient child. She eagerly complied with her
      mother’s new wishes. But as she had got into the habit of hiding
      from her mother in some corner, and of crying out “Tiu-tiu!”
      so even that day she returned more than once to the game.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna tried desperately to amuse Lelechka. This was not
      so easy because restless, threatening thoughts obtruded themselves
      constantly.
    

      “Why does Lelechka keep on recalling the tiu-tiu? Why does
      she not get tired of the same thing—of eternally closing her eyes,
      and of hiding her face? Perhaps,” thought Serafima Aleksandrovna,
      “she is not as strongly drawn to the world as other children, who
      are attracted by many things. If this is so, is it not a sign of organic
      weakness? Is it not a germ of the unconscious non-desire to live?”
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna was tormented by presentiments. She felt ashamed of
      herself for ceasing to play hide and seek with Lelechka before Fedosya.
      But this game had become agonising to her, all the more agonising because
      she had a real desire to play it, and because something drew her very
      strongly to hide herself from Lelechka and to seek out the hiding child.
      Serafima Aleksandrovna herself began the game once or twice, though she
      played it with a heavy heart. She suffered as though committing an evil
      deed with full consciousness.
    

      It was a sad day for Serafima Aleksandrovna.
    











      V
    

      Lelechka was about to fall asleep. No sooner had she climbed into her
      little bed, protected by a network on all sides, than her eyes began to
      close from fatigue. Her mother covered her with a blue blanket. Lelechka
      drew her sweet little hands from under the blanket and stretched them out
      to embrace her mother. Her mother bent down. Lelechka, with a tender
      expression on her sleepy face, kissed her mother and let her head fall on
      the pillow. As her hands hid themselves under the blanket Lelechka
      whispered: “The hands tiu-tiu!”
    

      The mother’s heart seemed to stop—Lelechka lay there so small,
      so frail, so quiet. Lelechka smiled gently, closed her eyes and said
      quietly: “The eyes tiu-tiu!”
    

      Then even more quietly: “Lelechka tiu-tiu!”
    

      With these words she fell asleep, her face pressing the pillow. She seemed
      so small and so frail under the blanket that covered her. Her mother
      looked at her with sad eyes.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna remained standing over Lelechka’s bed a long
      while, and she kept looking at Lelechka with tenderness and fear.
    

      “I’m a mother: is it possible that I shouldn’t be able
      to protect her?” she thought, as she imagined the various ills that
      might befall Lelechka.
    

      She prayed long that night, but the prayer did not relieve her sadness.
    

      VI
    

Several days
      passed. Lelechka caught cold. The fever came upon her at night. When
      Serafima Aleksandrovna, awakened by Fedosya, came to Lelechka and saw her
      looking so hot, so restless, and so tormented, she instantly recalled the
      evil omen, and a hopeless despair took possession of her from the first
      moments.
    

      A doctor was called, and everything was done that is usual on such
      occasions—but the inevitable happened. Serafima Aleksandrovna tried
      to console herself with the hope that Lelechka would get well, and would
      again laugh and play—yet this seemed to her an unthinkable
      happiness! And Lelechka grew feebler from hour to hour.
    

      All simulated tranquillity, so as not to frighten Serafima Aleksandrovna,
      but their masked faces only made her sad.
    

      Nothing made her so unhappy as the reiterations of Fedosya, uttered
      between sobs: “She hid herself and hid herself, our Lelechka!”
    

      But the thoughts of Serafima Aleksandrovna were confused, and she could
      not quite grasp what was happening.
    

      Fever was consuming Lelechka, and there were times when she lost
      consciousness and spoke in delirium. But when she returned to herself she
      bore her pain and her fatigue with gentle good nature; she smiled feebly
      at her mamochka, so that her mamochka should not see how
      much she suffered. Three days passed, torturing like a nightmare. Lelechka
      grew quite feeble. She did not know that she was dying.
    

      She glanced at her mother with her dimmed eyes, and lisped in a scarcely
      audible, hoarse voice: “Tiu-tiu, mamochka! Make tiu-tiu,
      mamochka!”
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna hid her face behind the curtains near Lelechka’s
      bed. How tragic!
    

      “Mamochka!” called Lelechka in an almost inaudible
      voice.
    

      Lelechka’s mother bent over her, and Lelechka, her vision grown
      still more dim, saw her mother’s pale, despairing face for the last
      time.
    

      “A white mamochka!” whispered Lelechka.
    

Mamochka’s white face became blurred, and everything grew
      dark before Lelechka. She caught the edge of the bed-cover feebly with her
      hands and whispered: “Tiu-tiu!”
    

      Something rattled in her throat; Lelechka opened and again closed her
      rapidly paling lips, and died.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna was in dumb despair as she left Lelechka, and went
      out of the room. She met her husband.
    

      “Lelechka is dead,” she said in a quiet, dull voice.
    

      Sergey Modestovich looked anxiously at her pale face. He was struck by the
      strange stupor in her formerly animated handsome features.
    

      VII
    

Lelechka was
      dressed, placed in a little coffin, and carried into the parlour. Serafima
      Aleksandrovna was standing by the coffin and looking dully at her dead
      child. Sergey Modestovich went to his wife and, consoling her with cold,
      empty words, tried to draw her away from the coffin. Serafima
      Aleksandrovna smiled.
    

      “Go away,” she said quietly. “Lelechka is playing. She’ll
      be up in a minute.”
    

      “Sima, my dear, don’t agitate yourself,” said Sergey
      Modestovich in a whisper. “You must resign yourself to your fate.”
    

      “She’ll be up in a minute,” persisted Serafima
      Aleksandrovna, her eyes fixed on the dead little girl.
    

      Sergey Modestovich looked round him cautiously: he was afraid of the
      unseemly and of the ridiculous.
    

      “Sima, don’t agitate yourself,” he repeated. “This
      would be a miracle, and miracles do not happen in the nineteenth century.”
    

      No sooner had he said these words than Sergey Modestovich felt their
      irrelevance to what had happened. He was confused and annoyed.
    

      He took his wife by the arm, and cautiously led her away from the coffin.
      She did not oppose him.
    

      Her face seemed tranquil and her eyes were dry. She went into the nursery
      and began to walk round the room, looking into those places where Lelechka
      used to hide herself. She walked all about the room, and bent now and then
      to look under the table or under the bed, and kept on repeating
      cheerfully: “Where is my little one? Where is my Lelechka?”
    

      After she had walked round the room once she began to make her quest anew.
      Fedosya, motionless, with dejected face, sat in a corner, and looked
      frightened at her mistress; then she suddenly burst out sobbing, and she
      wailed loudly:
    

      “She hid herself, and hid herself, our Lelechka, our angelic little
      soul!”
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna trembled, paused, cast a perplexed look at Fedosya,
      began to weep, and left the nursery quietly.
    

      VIII
    

Sergey Modestovich
      hurried the funeral. He saw that Serafima Aleksandrovna was terribly
      shocked by her sudden misfortune, and as he feared for her reason he
      thought she would more readily be diverted and consoled when Lelechka was
      buried.
    

      Next morning Serafima Aleksandrovna dressed with particular care—for
      Lelechka. When she entered the parlour there were several people between
      her and Lelechka. The priest and deacon paced up and down the room; clouds
      of blue smoke drifted in the air, and there was a smell of incense. There
      was an oppressive feeling of heaviness in Serafima Aleksandrovna’s
      head as she approached Lelechka. Lelechka lay there still and pale, and
      smiled pathetically. Serafima Aleksandrovna laid her cheek upon the edge
      of Lelechka’s coffin, and whispered: “Tiu-tiu, little
      one!”
    

      The little one did not reply. Then there was some kind of stir and
      confusion around Serafima Aleksandrovna; strange, unnecessary faces bent
      over her, some one held her—and Lelechka was carried away somewhere.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna stood up erect, sighed in a lost way, smiled, and
      called loudly: “Lelechka!”
    

      Lelechka was being carried out. The mother threw herself after the coffin
      with despairing sobs, but she was held back. She sprang behind the door,
      through which Lelechka had passed, sat down there on the floor, and as she
      looked through the crevice, she cried out: “Lelechka, tiu-tiu!”
    

      Then she put her head out from behind the door, and began to laugh.
    

      Lelechka was quickly carried away from her mother, and those who carried
      her seemed to run rather than to walk.
    











      DETHRONED
    

      BY I.N. POTAPENKO
    

"Well?”
      Captain Zarubkin’s wife called out impatiently to her husband,
      rising from the sofa and turning to face him as he entered.
    

      “He doesn’t know anything about it,” he replied
      indifferently, as if the matter were of no interest to him. Then he asked
      in a businesslike tone: “Nothing for me from the office?”
    

      “Why should I know? Am I your errand boy?”
    

      “How they dilly-dally! If only the package doesn’t come too
      late. It’s so important!”
    

      “Idiot!”
    

      “Who’s an idiot?”
    

      “You, with your indifference, your stupid egoism.”
    

      The captain said nothing. He was neither surprised nor insulted. On the
      contrary, the smile on his face was as though he had received a
      compliment. These wifely animadversions, probably oft-heard, by no means
      interfered with his domestic peace.
    

      “It can’t be that the man doesn’t know when his wife is
      coming back home,” Mrs. Zarubkin continued excitedly. “She’s
      written to him every day of the four months that she’s been away.
      The postmaster told me so.”
    

      “Semyonov! Ho, Semyonov! Has any one from the office been here?”
    

      “I don’t know, your Excellency,” came in a loud, clear
      voice from back of the room.
    

      “Why don’t you know? Where have you been?”
    

      “I went to Abramka, your Excellency.”
    

      “The tailor again?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency, the tailor Abramka.”
    

      The captain spat in annoyance.
    

      “And where is Krynka?”
    

      “He went to market, your Excellency.”
    

      “Was he told to go to market?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      The captain spat again.
    

      “Why do you keep spitting? Such vulgar manners!” his wife
      cried angrily. “You behave at home like a drunken subaltern. You
      haven’t the least consideration for your wife. You are so coarse in
      your behaviour towards me! Do, please, go to your office.”
    

      “Semyonov.”
    

      “Your Excellency?”
    

      “If the package comes, please have it sent back to the office and
      say I’ve gone there. And listen! Some one must always be here. I won’t
      have everybody out of the house at the same time. Do you hear?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      The captain put on his cap to go. In the doorway he turned and addressed
      his wife.
    

      “Please, Tasya, please don’t send all the servants on your
      errands at the same time. Something important may turn up, and then there’s
      nobody here to attend to it.”
    

      He went out, and his wife remained reclining in the sofa corner as if his
      plea were no concern of hers. But scarcely had he left the house, when she
      called out:
    

      “Semyonov, come here. Quick!”
    

      A bare-footed unshaven man in dark blue pantaloons and cotton shirt
      presented himself. His stocky figure and red face made a wholesome
      appearance. He was the Captain’s orderly.
    

      “At your service, your Excellency.”
    

      “Listen, Semyonov, you don’t seem to be stupid.”
    

      “I don’t know, your Excellency.”
    

      “For goodness’ sake, drop ‘your Excellency.’ I am
      not your superior officer.”
    

      “Yes, your Excel—”
    

      “Idiot!”
    

      But the lady’s manner toward the servant was far friendlier than
      toward her husband. Semyonov had it in his power to perform important
      services for her, while the captain had not come up to her expectations.
    

      “Listen, Semyonov, how do you and the doctor’s men get along
      together? Are you friendly?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      “Intolerable!” cried the lady, jumping up. “Stop using
      that silly title. Can’t you speak like a sensible man?”
    

      Semyonov had been standing in the stiff attitude of attention, with the
      palms of his hands at the seams of his trousers. Now he suddenly relaxed,
      and even wiped his nose with his fist.
    

      “That’s the way we are taught to do,” he said
      carelessly, with a clownish grin. “The gentlemen, the officers,
      insist on it.”
    

      “Now, tell me, you are on good terms with the doctor’s men?”
    

      “You mean Podmar and Shuchok? Of course, we’re friends.”
    

      “Very well, then go straight to them and try to find out when Mrs.
      Shaldin is expected back. They ought to know. They must be getting things
      ready against her return—cleaning her bedroom and fixing it up. Do
      you understand? But be careful to find out right. And also be very careful
      not to let on for whom you are finding it out. Do you understand?’
    

      “Of course, I understand.”
    

      “Well, then, go. But one more thing. Since you’re going out,
      you may as well stop at Abramka’s again and tell him to come here
      right away. You understand?”
    

      “But his Excellency gave me orders to stay at home,” said
      Semyonov, scratching himself behind his ears.
    

      “Please don’t answer back. Just do as I tell you. Go on, now.”
    

      “At your service.” And the orderly, impressed by the lady’s
      severe military tone, left the room.
    

      Mrs. Zarubkin remained reclining on the sofa for a while. Then she rose
      and walked up and down the room and finally went to her bedroom, where her
      two little daughters were playing in their nurse’s care. She scolded
      them a bit and returned to her former place on the couch. Her every
      movement betrayed great excitement.
    








      Tatyana Grigoryevna Zarubkin was one of the most looked-up to ladies of
      the S—— Regiment and even of the whole town of Chmyrsk, where
      the regiment was quartered. To be sure, you hardly could say that, outside
      the regiment, the town could boast any ladies at all. There were very
      respectable women, decent wives, mothers, daughters and widows of
      honourable citizens; but they all dressed in cotton and flannel, and on
      high holidays made a show of cheap Cashmere gowns over which they wore gay
      shawls with borders of wonderful arabesques. Their hats and other headgear
      gave not the faintest evidence of good taste. So they could scarcely be
      dubbed “ladies.” They were satisfied to be called “women.”
      Each one of them, almost, had the name of her husband’s trade or
      position tacked to her name—Mrs. Grocer so-and-so, Mrs. Mayor
      so-and-so, Mrs. Milliner so-and-so, etc. Genuine ladies in the
      Russian society sense had never come to the town before the S——
      Regiment had taken up its quarters there; and it goes without saying that
      the ladies of the regiment had nothing in common, and therefore no
      intercourse with, the women of the town. They were so dissimilar that they
      were like creatures of a different species.
    

      There is no disputing that Tatyana Grigoryevna Zarubkin was one of the
      most looked-up-to of the ladies. She invariably played the most important
      part at all the regimental affairs—the amateur theatricals, the
      social evenings, the afternoon teas. If the captain’s wife was not
      to be present, it was a foregone conclusion that the affair would not be a
      success.
    

      The most important point was that Mrs. Zarubkin had the untarnished
      reputation of being the best-dressed of all the ladies. She was always the
      most distinguished looking at the annual ball. Her gown for the occasion,
      ordered from Moscow, was always chosen with the greatest regard for her
      charms and defects, and it was always exquisitely beautiful. A new fashion
      could not gain admittance to the other ladies of the regiment except by
      way of the captain’s wife. Thanks to her good taste in dressing, the
      stately blonde was queen at all the balls and in all the salons of
      Chmyrsk. Another advantage of hers was that although she was nearly forty
      she still looked fresh and youthful, so that the young officers were
      constantly hovering about her and paying her homage.
    

      November was a very lively month in the regiment’s calendar. It was
      on the tenth of November that the annual ball took place. The ladies, of
      course, spent their best efforts in preparation for this event. Needless
      to say that in these arduous activities, Abramka Stiftik, the ladies’
      tailor, played a prominent role. He was the one man in Chmyrsk who had any
      understanding at all for the subtle art of the feminine toilet.
      Preparations had begun in his shop in August already. Within the last
      weeks his modest parlour—furnished with six shabby chairs placed
      about a round table, and a fly-specked mirror on the wall—the
      atmosphere heavy with a smell of onions and herring, had been filled from
      early morning to the evening hours with the most charming and elegant of
      the fairer sex. There was trying-on and discussion of styles and selection
      of material. It was all very nerve-racking for the ladies.
    

      The only one who had never appeared in this parlour was the captain’s
      wife. That had been a thorn in Abramka’s flesh. He had spent days
      and nights going over in his mind how he could rid this lady of the, in
      his opinion, wretched habit of ordering her clothes from Moscow. For this
      ball, however, as she herself had told him, she had not ordered a dress
      but only material from out of town, from which he deduced that he was to
      make the gown for her. But there was only one week left before the ball,
      and still she had not come to him. Abramka was in a state of feverishness.
      He longed once to make a dress for Mrs. Zarubkin. It would add to his
      glory. He wanted to prove that he understood his trade just as well as any
      tailor in Moscow, and that it was quite superfluous for her to order her
      gowns outside of Chmyrsk. He would come out the triumphant competitor of
      Moscow.
    

      As each day passed and Mrs. Zarubkin did not appear in his shop, his
      nervousness increased. Finally she ordered a dressing-jacket from him—but
      not a word said of a ball gown. What was he to think of it?
    

      So, when Semyonov told him that Mrs. Zarubkin was expecting him at her
      home, it goes without saying that he instantly removed the dozen pins in
      his mouth, as he was trying on a customer’s dress, told one of his
      assistants to continue with the fitting, and instantly set off to call on
      the captain’s wife. In this case, it was not a question of a mere
      ball gown, but of the acquisition of the best customer in town.
    

      Although Abramka wore a silk hat and a suit in keeping with the silk hat,
      still he was careful not to ring at the front entrance, but always knocked
      at the back door. At another time when the captain’s orderly was not
      in the house—for the captain’s orderly also performed the
      duties of the captain’s cook—he might have knocked long and
      loud. On other occasions a cannon might have been shot off right next to
      Tatyana Grigoryevna’s ears and she would not have lifted her fingers
      to open the door. But now she instantly caught the sound of the modest
      knocking and opened the back door herself for Abramka.
    

      “Oh!” she cried delightedly. “You, Abramka!”
    

      She really wanted to address him less familiarly, as was more befitting so
      dignified a man in a silk hat; but everybody called him “Abramka,”
      and he would have been very much surprised had he been honoured with his
      full name, Abram Srulevich Stiftik. So she thought it best to address him
      as the others did.
    

      Mr. “Abramka” was tall and thin. There was always a melancholy
      expression in his pale face. He had a little stoop, a long and very heavy
      greyish beard. He had been practising his profession for thirty years.
      Ever since his apprenticeship he had been called “Abramka,”
      which did not strike him as at all derogatory or unfitting. Even his
      shingle read: “Ladies’ Tailor: Abramka Stiftik”—the
      most valid proof that he deemed his name immaterial, but that the chief
      thing to him was his art. As a matter of fact, he had attained, if not
      perfection in tailoring, yet remarkable skill. To this all the ladies of
      the S—— Regiment could attest with conviction.
    

      Abramka removed his silk hat, stepped into the kitchen, and said gravely,
      with profound feeling:
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin, I am entirely at your service.”
    

      “Come into the reception room. I have something very important to
      speak to you about.”
    

      Abramka followed in silence. He stepped softly on tiptoe, as if afraid of
      waking some one.
    

      “Sit down, Abramka, listen—but give me your word of honour,
      you won’t tell any one?” Tatyana Grigoryevna began, reddening
      a bit. She was ashamed to have to let the tailor Abramka into her secret,
      but since there was no getting around it, she quieted herself and in an
      instant had regained her ease.
    

      “I don’t know what you are speaking of, Mrs. Zarubkin,”
      Abramka rejoined. He assumed a somewhat injured manner. “Have you
      ever heard of Abramka ever babbling anything out? You certainly know that
      in my profession—you know everybody has some secret to be kept.”
    

      “Oh, you must have misunderstood me, Abramka. What sort of secrets
      do you mean?”
    

      “Well, one lady is a little bit one-sided, another lady”—he
      pointed to his breast—“is not quite full enough, another lady
      has scrawny arms—such things as that have to be covered up or filled
      out or laced in, so as to look better. That is where our art comes in. But
      we are in duty bound not to say anything about it.”
    

      Tatyana Grigoryevna smiled.
    

      “Well, I can assure you I am all right that way. There is nothing
      about me that needs to be covered up or filled out.”
    

      “Oh, as if I didn’t know that! Everybody knows that Mrs.
      Zarubkin’s figure is perfect,” Abramka cried, trying to
      flatter his new customer.
    

      Mrs. Zarubkin laughed and made up her mind to remember “Everybody
      knows that Mrs. Zarubkin’s figure is perfect.” Then she said:
    

      “You know that the ball is to take place in a week.”
    

      “Yes, indeed, Mrs. Zarubkin, in only one week; unfortunately, only
      one week,” replied Abramka, sighing.
    

      “But you remember your promise to make my dress for me for the ball
      this time?”
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin,” Abramka cried, laying his hand on his heart.
      “Have I said that I was not willing to make it? No, indeed, I said
      it must be made and made right—for Mrs. Zarubkin, it must be better
      than for any one else. That’s the way I feel about it.”
    

      “Splendid! Just what I wanted to know.”
    

      “But why don’t you show me your material? Why don’t you
      say to me, 'Here, Abramka, here is the stuff, make a dress?’ Abramka
      would work on it day and night.”
    

      “Ahem, that’s just it—I can’t order it. That is
      where the trouble comes in. Tell me, Abramka, what is the shortest time
      you need for making the dress? Listen, the very shortest?”
    

      Abramka shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “Well, is a week too much for a ball dress such as you will want? It’s
      got to be sewed, it can’t be pasted together, You, yourself, know
      that, Mrs. Zarubkin.”
    

      “But supposing I order it only three days before the ball?”
    

      Abramka started.
    

      “Only three days before the ball? A ball dress? Am I a god, Mrs.
      Zarubkin? I am nothing but the ladies’ tailor, Abramka Stiftik.”
    

      “Well, then you are a nice tailor!” said Tatyana Grigoryevna,
      scornfully. “In Moscow they made a ball dress for me in two days.”
    

      Abramka jumped up as if at a shot, and beat his breast.
    

      “Is that so? Then I say, Mrs. Zarubkin,” he cried
      pathetically, “if they made a ball gown for you in Moscow in two
      days, very well, then I will make a ball gown for you, if I must, in one
      day. I will neither eat nor sleep, and I won’t let my help off
      either for one minute. How does that suit you?”
    

      “Sit down, Abramka, thank you very much. I hope I shall not have to
      put such a strain on you. It really does not depend upon me, otherwise I
      should have ordered the dress from you long ago.”
    

      “It doesn’t depend upon you? Then upon whom does it depend?”
    

      “Ahem, it depends upon—but now, Abramka, remember this is just
      between you and me—it depends upon Mrs. Shaldin.”
    

      “Upon Mrs. Shaldin, the doctor’s wife? Why she isn’t
      even here.”
    

      “That’s just it. That is why I have to wait. How is it that a
      clever man like you, Abramka, doesn’t grasp the situation?”
    

      “Hm, hm! Let me see.” Abramka racked his brains for a solution
      of the riddle. How could it be that Mrs. Shaldin, who was away, should
      have anything to do with Mrs. Zarubkin’s order for a gown? No, that
      passed his comprehension.
    

      “She certainly will get back in time for the ball,” said Mrs.
      Zarubkin, to give him a cue.
    

      “Well, yes.”
    

      “And certainly will bring a dress back with her.”
    

      “Certainly!”
    

      “A dress from abroad, something we have never seen here—something
      highly original.”
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin!” Abramka cried, as if a truth of tremendous
      import had been revealed to him. “Mrs. Zarubkin, I understand. Why
      certainly! Yes, but that will be pretty hard.”
    

      “That’s just it.”
    

      Abramka reflected a moment, then said:
    

      “I assure you, Mrs. Zarubkin, you need not be a bit uneasy. I will
      make a dress for you that will be just as grand as the one from abroad. I
      assure you, your dress will be the most elegant one at the ball, just as
      it always has been. I tell you, my name won’t be Abramka Stiftik if—”
    

      His eager asseverations seemed not quite to satisfy the captain’s
      wife. Her mind was not quite set at ease. She interrupted him.
    

      “But the style, Abramka, the style! You can’t possibly guess
      what the latest fashion is abroad.”
    

      “Why shouldn’t I know what the latest fashion is, Mrs.
      Zarubkin? In Kiev I have a friend who publishes fashion-plates. I will
      telegraph to him, and he will immediately send me pictures of the latest
      French models. The telegram will cost only eighty cents, Mrs. Zarubkin,
      and I swear to you I will copy any dress he sends. Mrs. Shaldin can’t
      possibly have a dress like that.”
    

      “All very well and good, and that’s what we’ll do. Still
      we must wait until Mrs. Shaldin comes back. Don’t you see, Abramka,
      I must have exactly the same style that she has? Can’t you see, so
      that nobody can say that she is in the latest fashion?”
    

      At this point Semyonov entered the room cautiously. He was wearing the
      oddest-looking jacket and the captain’s old boots. His hair was
      rumpled, and his eyes were shining suspiciously. There was every sign that
      he had used the renewal of friendship with the doctor’s men as a
      pretext for a booze.
    

      “I had to stand them some brandy, your Excellency,” he said
      saucily, but catching his mistress’s threatening look, he lowered
      his head guiltily.
    

      “Idiot,” she yelled at him, “face about. Be off with you
      to the kitchen.”
    

      In his befuddlement, Semyonov had not noticed Abramka’s presence.
      Now he became aware of him, faced about and retired to the kitchen
      sheepishly.
    

      “What an impolite fellow,” said Abramka reproachfully.
    

      “Oh, you wouldn’t believe—” said the captain’s
      wife, but instantly followed Semyonov into the kitchen.
    

      Semyonov aware of his awful misdemeanour, tried to stand up straight and
      give a report.
    

      “She will come back, your Excellency, day after to-morrow toward
      evening. She sent a telegram.”
    

      “Is that true now?”
    

      “I swear it’s true. Shuchok saw it himself.”
    

      “All right, very good. You will get something for this.”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      “Silence, you goose. Go on, set the table.”
    

      Abramka remained about ten minutes longer with the captain’s wife,
      and on leaving said:
    

      “Let me assure you once again, Mrs. Zarubkin, you needn’t
      worry; just select the style, and I will make a gown for you that the best
      tailor in Paris can’t beat.” He pressed his hand to his heart
      in token of his intention to do everything in his power for Mrs. Zarubkin.
    








      It was seven o’clock in the evening. Mrs. Shaldin and her trunk had
      arrived hardly half an hour before, yet the captain’s wife was
      already there paying visit; which was a sign of the warm friendship that
      existed between the two women. They kissed each other and fell to talking.
      The doctor, a tall man of forty-five, seemed discomfited by the visit, and
      passed unfriendly side glances at his guest. He had hoped to spend that
      evening undisturbed with his wife, and he well knew that when the ladies
      of the regiment came to call upon each other “for only a second,”
      it meant a whole evening of listening to idle talk.
    

      “You wouldn’t believe me, dear, how bored I was the whole time
      you were away, how I longed for you, Natalie Semyonovna. But you probably
      never gave us a thought.”
    

      “Oh, how can you say anything like that. I was thinking of you every
      minute, every second. If I hadn’t been obliged to finish the cure, I
      should have returned long ago. No matter how beautiful it may be away from
      home, still the only place to live is among those that are near and dear
      to you.”
    

      These were only the preliminary soundings. They lasted with variations for
      a quarter of an hour. First Mrs. Shaldin narrated a few incidents of the
      trip, then Mrs. Zarubkin gave a report of some of the chief happenings in
      the life of the regiment. When the conversation was in full swing, and the
      samovar was singing on the table, and the pancakes were spreading their
      appetising odour, the captain’s wife suddenly cried:
    

      “I wonder what the fashions are abroad now. I say, you must have
      feasted your eyes on them!”
    

      Mrs. Shaldin simply replied with a scornful gesture.
    

      “Other people may like them, but I don’t care for them one
      bit. I am glad we here don’t get to see them until a year later. You
      know, Tatyana Grigoryevna, you sometimes see the ugliest styles.”
    

      “Really?” asked the captain’s wife eagerly, her eyes
      gleaming with curiosity. The great moment of complete revelation seemed to
      have arrived.
    

      “Perfectly hideous, I tell you. Just imagine, you know how nice the
      plain skirts were. Then why change them? But no, to be in style now, the
      skirts have to be draped. Why? It is just a sign of complete lack of
      imagination. And in Lyons they got out a new kind of silk—but that
      is still a French secret.”
    

      “Why a secret? The silk is certainly being worn already?”
    

      “Yes, one does see it being worn already, but when it was first
      manufactured, the greatest secret was made of it. They were afraid the
      Germans would imitate. You understand?”
    

      “Oh, but what is the latest style?”
    

      “I really can’t explain it to you. All I know is, it is
      something awful.”
    

      “She can’t explain! That means she doesn’t want to
      explain. Oh, the cunning one. What a sly look she has in her eyes.”
      So thought the captain’s wife. From the very beginning of the
      conversation, the two warm friends, it need scarcely be said, were
      mutually distrustful. Each had the conviction that everything the other
      said was to be taken in the very opposite sense. They were of about the
      same age, Mrs. Shaldin possibly one or two years younger than Mrs.
      Zarubkin. Mrs. Zarubkin was rather plump, and had heavy light hair. Her
      appearance was blooming. Mrs. Shaldin was slim, though well proportioned.
      She was a brunette with a pale complexion and large dark eyes. They were
      two types of beauty very likely to divide the gentlemen of the regiment
      into two camps of admirers. But women are never content with halves. Mrs.
      Zarubkin wanted to see all the officers of the regiment at her feet, and
      so did Mrs. Shaldin. It naturally led to great rivalry between the two
      women, of which they were both conscious, though they always had the
      friendliest smiles for each other.
    

      Mrs. Shaldin tried to give a different turn to the conversation.
    

      “Do you think the ball will be interesting this year?”
    

      “Why should it be interesting?” rejoined the captain’s
      wife scornfully. “Always the same people, the same old humdrum
      jog-trot.”
    

      “I suppose the ladies have been besieging our poor Abramka?”
    

      “I really can’t tell you. So far as I am concerned, I have
      scarcely looked at what he made for me.”
    

      “Hm, how’s that? Didn’t you order your dress from Moscow
      again?”
    

      “No, it really does not pay. I am sick of the bother of it all. Why
      all that trouble? For whom? Our officers don’t care a bit how one
      dresses. They haven’t the least taste.”
    

      “Hm, there’s something back of that,” thought Mrs.
      Shaldin.
    

      The captain’s wife continued with apparent indifference:
    

      “I can guess what a gorgeous dress you had made abroad. Certainly in
      the latest fashion?”
    

      “I?” Mrs. Shaldin laughed innocently. “How could I get
      the time during my cure to think of a dress? As a matter of fact, I
      completely forgot the ball, thought of it at the last moment, and bought
      the first piece of goods I laid my hands on.”
    

      “Pink?”
    

      “Oh, no. How can you say pink!”
    

      “Light blue, then?”
    

      “You can’t call it exactly light blue. It is a very undefined
      sort of colour. I really wouldn’t know what to call it.”
    

      “But it certainly must have some sort of a shade?”
    

      “You may believe me or not if you choose, but really I don’t
      know. It’s a very indefinite shade.”
    

      “Is it Sura silk?”
    

      “No, I can’t bear Sura. It doesn’t keep the folds well.”
    

      “I suppose it is crÃªpe de Chine?”
    

      “Heavens, no! CrÃªpe de Chine is much too expensive for me.”
    

      “Then what can it be?”
    

      “Oh, wait a minute, what is the name of that goods? You know
      there are so many funny new names now. They don’t make any sense.”
    

      “Then show me your dress, dearest. Do please show me your dress.”
    

      Mrs. Shaldin seemed to be highly embarrassed.
    

      “I am so sorry I can’t. It is way down at the bottom of the
      trunk. There is the trunk. You see yourself I couldn’t unpack it
      now.”
    

      The trunk, close to the wall, was covered with oil cloth and tied tight
      with heavy cords. The captain’s wife devoured it with her eyes. She
      would have liked to see through and through it. She had nothing to say in
      reply, because it certainly was impossible to ask her friend, tired out
      from her recent journey, to begin to unpack right away and take out all
      her things just to show her her new dress. Yet she could not tear her eyes
      away from the trunk. There was a magic in it that held her enthralled. Had
      she been alone she would have begun to unpack it herself, nor even have
      asked the help of a servant to undo the knots. Now there was nothing left
      for her but to turn her eyes sorrowfully away from the fascinating object
      and take up another topic of conversation to which she would be utterly
      indifferent. But she couldn’t think of anything else to talk about.
      Mrs. Shaldin must have prepared herself beforehand. She must have
      suspected something. So now Mrs. Zarubkin pinned her last hope to Abramka’s
      inventiveness. She glanced at the clock.
    

      “Dear me,” she exclaimed, as if surprised at the lateness of
      the hour. “I must be going. I don’t want to disturb you any
      longer either, dearest. You must be very tired. I hope you rest well.”
    

      She shook hands with Mrs. Shaldin, kissed her and left.
    








      Abramka Stiftik had just taken off his coat and was doing some ironing in
      his shirt sleeves, when a peculiar figure appeared in his shop. It was
      that of a stocky orderly in a well-worn uniform without buttons and old
      galoshes instead of boots. His face was gloomy-looking and was covered
      with a heavy growth of hair. Abramka knew this figure well. It seemed
      always just to have been awakened from the deepest sleep.
    

      “Ah, Shuchok, what do you want?”
    

      “Mrs. Shaldin would like you to call upon her,” said Shuchok.
      He behaved as if he had come on a terribly serious mission.
    

      “Ah, that’s so, your lady has come back. I heard about it. You
      see I am very busy. Still you may tell her I am coming right away. I just
      want to finish ironing Mrs. Konopotkin’s dress.”
    

      Abramka simply wanted to keep up appearances, as always when he was sent
      for. But his joy at the summons to Mrs. Shaldin was so great that to the
      astonishment of his helpers and Shuchok he left immediately.
    

      He found Mrs. Shaldin alone. She had not slept well the two nights before
      and had risen late that morning. Her husband had left long before for the
      Military Hospital. She was sitting beside her open trunk taking her things
      out very carefully.
    

      “How do you do, Mrs. Shaldin? Welcome back to Chmyrsk. I
      congratulate you on your happy arrival.”
    

      “Oh, how do you do, Abramka?” said Mrs. Shaldin delightedly;
      “we haven’t seen each other for a long time, have we? I was
      rather homesick for you.”
    

      “Oh, Mrs. Shaldin, you must have had a very good time abroad. But
      what do you need me for? You certainly brought a dress back with you?”
    

      “Abramka always comes in handy,” said Mrs. Shaldin jestingly.
      “We ladies of the regiment are quite helpless without Abramka. Take
      a seat.”
    

      Abramka seated himself. He felt much more at ease in Mrs. Shaldin’s
      home than in Mrs. Zarubkin’s. Mrs. Shaldin did not order her clothes
      from Moscow. She was a steady customer of his. In this room he had many a
      time circled about the doctor’s wife with a yard measure, pins,
      chalk and scissors, had kneeled down beside her, raised himself to his
      feet, bent over again and stood puzzling over some difficult problem of
      dressmaking—how low to cut the dress out at the neck, how long to
      make the train, how wide the hem, and so on. None of the ladies of the
      regiment ordered as much from him as Mrs. Shaldin. Her grandmother would
      send her material from Kiev or the doctor would go on a professional trip
      to Chernigov and always bring some goods back with him; or sometimes her
      aunt in Voronesh would make her a gift of some silk.
    

      “Abramka is always ready to serve Mrs. Shaldin first,” said
      the tailor, though seized with a little pang, as if bitten by a guilty
      conscience.
    

      “Are you sure you are telling the truth? Is Abramka always to be
      depended upon? Eh, is he?” She looked at him searchingly from
      beneath drooping lids.
    

      “What a question,” rejoined Abramka. His face quivered
      slightly. His feeling of discomfort was waxing. “Has Abramka ever—”
    

      “Oh, things can happen. But, all right, never mind. I brought a
      dress along with me. I had to have it made in a great hurry, and there is
      just a little more to be done on it. Now if I give you this dress to
      finish, can I be sure that you positively won’t tell another soul
      how it is made?”
    

      “Mrs. Shaldin, oh, Mrs. Shaldin,” said Abramka reproachfully.
      Nevertheless, the expression of his face was not so reassuring as usual.
    

      “You give me your word of honour?”
    

      “Certainly! My name isn’t Abramka Stiftik if I—”
    

      “Well, all right, I will trust you. But be careful. You know of whom
      you must be careful?”
    

      “Who is that, Mrs. Shaldin?”
    

      “Oh, you know very well whom I mean. No, you needn’t put your
      hand on your heart. She was here to see me yesterday and tried in every
      way she could to find out how my dress is made. But she couldn’t get
      it out of me.” Abramka sighed. Mrs. Shaldin seemed to suspect his
      betrayal. “I am right, am I not? She has not had her dress made yet,
      has she? She waited to see my dress, didn’t she? And she told you to
      copy the style, didn’t she?” Mrs, Shaldin asked with honest
      naÃ¯vetÃ©. “But I warn you, Abramka, if you give away the least little
      thing about my dress, then all is over between you and me. Remember that.”
    

      Abramka’s hand went to his heart again, and the gesture carried the
      same sense of conviction as of old.
    

      “Mrs. Shaldin, how can you speak like that?”
    

      “Wait a moment.”
    

      Mrs. Shaldin left the room. About ten minutes passed during which Abramka
      had plenty of time to reflect. How could he have given the captain’s
      wife a promise like that so lightly? What was the captain’s wife to
      him as compared with the doctor’s wife? Mrs. Zarubkin had never
      given him a really decent order—just a few things for the house and
      some mending. Supposing he were now to perform this great service for her,
      would that mean that he could depend upon her for the future? Was any
      woman to be depended upon? She would wear this dress out and go back to
      ordering her clothes from Moscow again. But Mrs. Shaldin, she was
      very different. He could forgive her having brought this one dress along
      from abroad. What woman in Russia would have refrained, when abroad, from
      buying a new dress? Mrs. Shaldin would continue to be his steady customer
      all the same.
    

      The door opened. Abramka rose involuntarily, and clasped his hands in
      astonishment.
    

      “Well,” he exclaimed rapturously, “that is a dress, that
      is—My, my!” He was so stunned he could find nothing more to
      say. And how charming Mrs. Shaldin looked in her wonderful gown! Her tall
      slim figure seemed to have been made for it. What simple yet elegant
      lines. At first glance you would think it was nothing more than an
      ordinary house-gown, but only at first glance. If you looked at it again,
      you could tell right away that it met all the requirements of a fancy
      ball-gown. What struck Abramka most was that it had no waist line, that it
      did not consist of bodice and skirt. That was strange. It was just caught
      lightly together under the bosom, which it brought out in relief. Draped
      over the whole was a sort of upper garment of exquisite old-rose lace
      embroidered with large silk flowers, which fell from the shoulders and
      broadened out in bold superb lines. The dress was cut low and edged with a
      narrow strip of black down around the bosom, around the bottom of the lace
      drapery, and around the hem of the skirt. A wonderful fan of feathers to
      match the down edging gave the finishing touch.
    

      “Well, how do you like it, Abramka!” asked Mrs. Shaldin with a
      triumphant smile.
    

      “Glorious, glorious! I haven’t the words at my command. What a
      dress! No, I couldn’t make a dress like that. And how beautifully it
      fits you, as if you had been born in it, Mrs. Shaldin. What do you call
      the style?”
    

      “Empire.”
    

      “Ampeer?” he queried. “Is that a new style? Well, well,
      what people don’t think of. Tailors like us might just as well throw
      our needles and scissors away.”
    

      “Now, listen, Abramka, I wouldn’t have shown it to you if
      there were not this sewing to be done on it. You are the only one who will
      have seen it before the ball. I am not even letting my husband look at it.”
    

      “Oh, Mrs. Shaldin, you can rely upon me as upon a rock. But after
      the ball may I copy it?”
    

      “Oh, yes, after the ball copy it as much as you please, but not now,
      not for anything in the world.”
    

      There were no doubts in Abramka’s mind when he left the doctor’s
      house. He had arrived at his decision. That superb creation had conquered
      him. It would be a piece of audacity on his part, he felt, even to think
      of imitating such a gown. Why, it was not a gown. It was a dream, a
      fantastic vision—without a bodice, without puffs or frills or tawdry
      trimmings of any sort. Simplicity itself and yet so chic.
    

      Back in his shop he opened the package of fashion-plates that had just
      arrived from Kiev. He turned the pages and stared in astonishment. What
      was that? Could he trust his eyes? An Empire gown. There it was, with the
      broad voluptuous drapery of lace hanging from the shoulders and the edging
      of down. Almost exactly the same thing as Mrs. Shaldin’s.
    

      He glanced up and saw Semyonov outside the window. He had certainly come
      to fetch him to the captain’s wife, who must have ordered him to
      watch the tailor’s movements, and must have learned that he had just
      been at Mrs. Shaldin’s. Semyonov entered and told him his mistress
      wanted to see him right away.
    

      Abramka slammed the fashion magazine shut as if afraid that Semyonov might
      catch a glimpse of the new Empire fashion and give the secret away.
    

      “I will come immediately,” he said crossly.
    

      He picked up his fashion plates, put the yard measure in his pocket,
      rammed his silk hat sorrowfully on his head and set off for the captain’s
      house. He found Mrs. Zarubkin pacing the room excitedly, greeted her, but
      carefully avoided meeting her eyes.
    

      “Well, what did you find out?”
    

      “Nothing, Mrs. Zarubkin,” said Abramka dejectedly. “Unfortunately
      I couldn’t find out a thing.”
    

      “Idiot! I have no patience with you. Where are the fashion plates?”
    

      “Here, Mrs. Zarubkin.”
    

      She turned the pages, looked at one picture after the other, and suddenly
      her eyes shone and her cheeks reddened.
    

      “Oh, Empire! The very thing. Empire is the very latest. Make this
      one for me,” she cried commandingly.
    

      Abramka turned pale.
    

      “Ampeer, Mrs. Zarubkin? I can’t make that Ampeer dress for
      you,” he murmured.
    

      “Why not?” asked the captain’s wife, giving him a
      searching look.
    

      “Because—because—I can’t.”
    

      “Oh—h—h, you can’t? You know why you can’t.
      Because that is the style of Mrs. Shaldin’s dress. So that is the
      reliability you boast so about? Great!”
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin, I will make any other dress you choose, but it is
      absolutely impossible for me to make this one.”
    

      “I don’t need your fashion plates, do you hear me? Get out of
      here, and don’t ever show your face again.”
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin, I—”
    

      “Get out of here,” repeated the captain’s wife, quite
      beside herself.
    

      The poor tailor stuck his yard measure, which he had already taken out,
      back into his pocket and left.
    

      Half an hour later the captain’s wife was entering a train for Kiev,
      carrying a large package which contained material for a dress. The captain
      had accompanied her to the station with a pucker in his forehead. That was
      five days before the ball.
    








      At the ball two expensive Empire gowns stood out conspicuously from among
      the more or less elegant gowns which had been finished in the shop of
      Abramka Stiftik, Ladies’ Tailor. The one gown adorned Mrs. Shaldin’s
      figure, the other the figure of the captain’s wife.
    

      Mrs. Zarubkin had bought her gown ready made at Kiev, and had returned
      only two hours before the beginning of the ball. She had scarcely had time
      to dress. Perhaps it would have been better had she not appeared at this
      one of the annual balls, had she not taken that fateful trip to Kiev. For
      in comparison with the make and style of Mrs. Shaldin’s dress, which
      had been brought abroad, hers was like the botched imitation of an
      amateur.
    

      That was evident to everybody, though the captain’s wife had her
      little group of partisans, who maintained with exaggerated eagerness that
      she looked extraordinarily fascinating in her dress and Mrs. Shaldin still
      could not rival her. But there was no mistaking it, there was little
      justice in this contention. Everybody knew better; what was worst of all,
      Mrs. Zarubkin herself knew better. Mrs. Shaldin’s triumph was
      complete.
    

      The two ladies gave each other the same friendly smiles as always, but one
      of them was experiencing the fine disdain and the derision of the
      conqueror, while the other was burning inside with the furious resentment
      of a dethroned goddess—goddess of the annual ball.
    

      From that time on Abramka cautiously avoided passing the captain’s
      house.
    











      THE SERVANT
    

      BY S.T. SEMYONOV
    

      I
    

Gerasim returned to
      Moscow just at a time when it was hardest to find work, a short while
      before Christmas, when a man sticks even to a poor job in the expectation
      of a present. For three weeks the peasant lad had been going about in vain
      seeking a position.
    

      He stayed with relatives and friends from his village, and although he had
      not yet suffered great want, it disheartened him that he, a strong young
      man, should go without work.
    

      Gerasim had lived in Moscow from early boyhood. When still a mere child,
      he had gone to work in a brewery as bottle-washer, and later as a lower
      servant in a house. In the last two years he had been in a merchant’s
      employ, and would still have held that position, had he not been summoned
      back to his village for military duty. However, he had not been drafted.
      It seemed dull to him in the village, he was not used to the country life,
      so he decided he would rather count the stones in Moscow than stay there.
    

      Every minute it was getting to be more and more irk-some for him to be
      tramping the streets in idleness. Not a stone did he leave unturned in his
      efforts to secure any sort of work. He plagued all of his acquaintances,
      he even held up people on the street and asked them if they knew of a
      situation—all in vain.
    

      Finally Gerasim could no longer bear being a burden on his people. Some of
      them were annoyed by his coming to them; and others had suffered
      unpleasantness from their masters on his account. He was altogether at a
      loss what to do. Sometimes he would go a whole day without eating.
    

      II
    

One day Gerasim
      betook himself to a friend from his village, who lived at the extreme
      outer edge of Moscow, near Sokolnik. The man was coachman to a merchant by
      the name of Sharov, in whose service he had been for many years. He had
      ingratiated himself with his master, so that Sharov trusted him absolutely
      and gave every sign of holding him in high favour. It was the man’s
      glib tongue, chiefly, that had gained him his master’s confidence.
      He told on all the servants, and Sharov valued him for it.
    

      Gerasim approached and greeted him. The coachman gave his guest a proper
      reception, served him with tea and something to eat, and asked him how he
      was doing.
    

      “Very badly, Yegor Danilych,” said Gerasim. “I’ve
      been without a job for weeks.”
    

      “Didn’t you ask your old employer to take you back?”
    

      “I did.”
    

      “He wouldn’t take you again?”
    

      “The position was filled already.”
    

      “That’s it. That’s the way you young fellows are. You
      serve your employers so-so, and when you leave your jobs, you usually have
      muddied up the way back to them. You ought to serve your masters so that
      they will think a lot of you, and when you come again, they will not
      refuse you, but rather dismiss the man who has taken your place.”
    

      “How can a man do that? In these days there aren’t any
      employers like that, and we aren’t exactly angels, either.”
    

      “What’s the use of wasting words? I just want to tell you
      about myself. If for some reason or other I should ever have to leave this
      place and go home, not only would Mr. Sharov, if I came back, take me on
      again without a word, but he would be glad to, too.”
    

      Gerasim sat there downcast. He saw his friend was boasting, and it
      occurred to him to gratify him.
    

      “I know it,” he said. “But it’s hard to find men
      like you, Yegor Danilych. If you were a poor worker, your master would not
      have kept you twelve years.”
    

      Yegor smiled. He liked the praise.
    

      “That’s it,” he said. “If you were to live and
      serve as I do, you wouldn’t be out of work for months and months.”
    

      Gerasim made no reply.
    

      Yegor was summoned to his master.
    

      “Wait a moment,” he said to Gerasim. “I’ll be
      right back.”
    

      “Very well.”
    

      III
    

Yegor came back and
      reported that inside of half an hour he would have to have the horses
      harnessed, ready to drive his master to town. He lighted his pipe and took
      several turns in the room. Then he came to a halt in front of Gerasim.
    

      “Listen, my boy,” he said, “if you want, I’ll ask
      my master to take you as a servant here.”
    

      “Does he need a man?”
    

      “We have one, but he’s not much good. He’s getting old,
      and it’s very hard for him to do the work. It’s lucky for us
      that the neighbourhood isn’t a lively one and the police don’t
      make a fuss about things being kept just so, else the old man couldn’t
      manage to keep the place clean enough for them.”
    

      “Oh, if you can, then please do say a word for me, Yegor Danilych. I’ll
      pray for you all my life. I can’t stand being without work any
      longer.”
    

      “All right, I’ll speak for you. Come again to-morrow, and in
      the meantime take this ten-kopek piece. It may come in handy.”
    

      “Thanks, Yegor Danilych. Then you will try for me? Please do
      me the favour.”
    

      “All right. I’ll try for you.”
    

      Gerasim left, and Yegor harnessed up his horses. Then he put on his
      coachman’s habit, and drove up to the front door. Mr. Sharov stepped
      out of the house, seated himself in the sleigh, and the horses galloped
      off. He attended to his business in town and returned home. Yegor,
      observing that his master was in a good humour, said to him:
    

      “Yegor Fiodorych, I have a favour to ask of you.”
    

      “What is it?”
    

      “There’s a young man from my village here, a good boy. He’s
      without a job.”
    

      “Well?”
    

      “Wouldn’t you take him?”
    

      “What do I want him for?”
    

      “Use him as man of all work round the place.”
    

      “How about Polikarpych?”
    

      “What good is he? It’s about time you dismissed him.”
    

      “That wouldn’t be fair. He has been with me so many years. I
      can’t let him go just so, without any cause.”
    

      “Supposing he has worked for you for years. He didn’t
      work for nothing. He got paid for it. He’s certainly saved up a few
      dollars for his old age.”
    

      “Saved up! How could he? From what? He’s not alone in the
      world. He has a wife to support, and she has to eat and drink also.”
    

      “His wife earns money, too, at day’s work as charwoman.”
    

      “A lot she could have made! Enough for kvas.”
    

      “Why should you care about Polikarpych and his wife? To tell you the
      truth, he’s a very poor servant. Why should you throw your money
      away on him? He never shovels the snow away on time, or does anything
      right. And when it comes his turn to be night watchman, he slips away at
      least ten times a night. It’s too cold for him. You’ll see,
      some day, because of him, you will have trouble with the police. The
      quarterly inspector will descend on us, and it won’t be so agreeable
      for you to be responsible for Polikarpych.”
    

      “Still, it’s pretty rough. He’s been with me fifteen
      years. And to treat him that way in his old age—it would be a sin.”
    

      “A sin! Why, what harm would you be doing him? He won’t
      starve. He’ll go to the almshouse. It will be better for him, too,
      to be quiet in his old age.”
    

      Sharov reflected.
    

      “All right,” he said finally. “Bring your friend here. I’ll
      see what I can do.”
    

      “Do take him, sir. I’m so sorry for him. He’s a good
      boy, and he’s been without work for such a long time. I know he’ll
      do his work well and serve you faithfully. On account of having to report
      for military duty, he lost his last position. If it hadn’t been for
      that, his master would never have let him go.”
    











      IV
    

      The next evening Gerasim came again and asked:
    

      “Well, could you do anything for me?”
    

      “Something, I believe. First let’s have some tea. Then we’ll
      go see my master.”
    

      Even tea had no allurements for Gerasim. He was eager for a decision; but
      under the compulsion of politeness to his host, he gulped down two glasses
      of tea, and then they betook themselves to Sharov.
    

      Sharov asked Gerasim where he had lived before and what work he could do.
      Then he told him he was prepared to engage him as man of all work, and he
      should come back the next day ready to take the place.
    

      Gerasim was fairly stunned by the great stroke of fortune. So overwhelming
      was his joy that his legs would scarcely carry him. He went to the
      coachman’s room, and Yegor said to him:
    

      “Well, my lad, see to it that you do your work right, so that I shan’t
      have to be ashamed of you. You know what masters are like. If you go wrong
      once, they’ll be at you forever after with their fault-finding, and
      never give you peace.”
    

      “Don’t worry about that, Yegor Danilych.”
    

      “Well—well.”
    

      Gerasim took leave, crossing the yard to go out by the gate. Polikarpych’s
      rooms gave on the yard, and a broad beam of light from the window fell
      across Gerasim’s way. He was curious to get a glimpse of his future
      home, but the panes were all frosted over, and it was impossible to peep
      through. However, he could hear what the people inside were saying.
    

      “What will we do now?” was said in a woman’s voice.
    

      “I don’t know, I don’t know,” a man, undoubtedly
      Polikarpych, replied. “Go begging, I suppose.”
    

      “That’s all we can do. There’s nothing else left,”
      said the woman. “Oh, we poor people, what a miserable life we lead.
      We work and work from early morning till late at night, day after day, and
      when we get old, then it’s, ‘Away with you!’”
    

      “What can we do? Our master is not one of us. It wouldn’t be
      worth the while to say much to him about it. He cares only for his own
      advantage.”
    

      “All the masters are so mean. They don’t think of any one but
      themselves. It doesn’t occur to them that we work for them honestly
      and faithfully for years, and use up our best strength in their service.
      They’re afraid to keep us a year longer, even though we’ve got
      all the strength we need to do their work. If we weren’t strong
      enough, we’d go of our own accord.”
    

      “The master’s not so much to blame as his coachman. Yegor
      Danilych wants to get a good position for his friend.”
    

      “Yes, he’s a serpent. He knows how to wag his tongue. You
      wait, you foul-mouthed beast, I’ll get even with you. I’ll go
      straight to the master and tell him how the fellow deceives him, how he
      steals the hay and fodder. I’ll put it down in writing, and he can
      convince himself how the fellow lies about us all.”
    

      “Don’t, old woman. Don’t sin.”
    

      “Sin? Isn’t what I said all true? I know to a dot what I’m
      saying, and I mean to tell it straight out to the master. He should see
      with his own eyes. Why not? What can we do now anyhow? Where shall we go?
      He’s ruined us, ruined us.”
    

      The old woman burst out sobbing.
    

      Gerasim heard all that, and it stabbed him like a dagger. He realised what
      misfortune he would be bringing the old people, and it made him sick at
      heart. He stood there a long while, saddened, lost in thought, then he
      turned and went back into the coachman’s room.
    

      “Ah, you forgot something?”
    

      “No, Yegor Danilych.” Gerasim stammered out, “I’ve
      come—listen—I want to thank you ever and ever so much—for
      the way you received me—and—and all the trouble you took for
      me—but—I can’t take the place.”
    

      “What! What does that mean?”
    

      “Nothing. I don’t want the place. I will look for another one
      for myself.”
    

      Yegor flew into a rage.
    

      “Did you mean to make a fool of me, did you, you idiot? You come
      here so meek—‘Try for me, do try for me’—and then
      you refuse to take the place. You rascal, you have disgraced me!”
    

      Gerasim found nothing to say in reply. He reddened, and lowered his eyes.
      Yegor turned his back scornfully and said nothing more.
    

      Then Gerasim quietly picked up his cap and left the coachman’s room.
      He crossed the yard rapidly, went out by the gate, and hurried off down
      the street. He felt happy and lighthearted.
    











      ONE AUTUMN NIGHT
    

      BY MAXIM GORKY
    

Once in the autumn
      I happened to be in a very unpleasant and inconvenient position. In the
      town where I had just arrived and where I knew not a soul, I found myself
      without a farthing in my pocket and without a night’s lodging.
    

      Having sold during the first few days every part of my costume without
      which it was still possible to go about, I passed from the town into the
      quarter called “Yste,” where were the steamship wharves—a
      quarter which during the navigation season fermented with boisterous,
      laborious life, but now was silent and deserted, for we were in the last
      days of October.
    

      Dragging my feet along the moist sand, and obstinately scrutinising it
      with the desire to discover in it any sort of fragment of food, I wandered
      alone among the deserted buildings and warehouses, and thought how good it
      would be to get a full meal.
    

      In our present state of culture hunger of the mind is more quickly
      satisfied than hunger of the body. You wander about the streets, you are
      surrounded by buildings not bad-looking from the outside and—you may
      safely say it—not so badly furnished inside, and the sight of them
      may excite within you stimulating ideas about architecture, hygiene, and
      many other wise and high-flying subjects. You may meet warmly and neatly
      dressed folks—all very polite, and turning away from you tactfully,
      not wishing offensively to notice the lamentable fact of your existence.
      Well, well, the mind of a hungry man is always better nourished and
      healthier than the mind of the well-fed man; and there you have a
      situation from which you may draw a very ingenious conclusion in favour of
      the ill fed.
    

      The evening was approaching, the rain was falling, and the wind blew
      violently from the north. It whistled in the empty booths and shops, blew
      into the plastered window-panes of the taverns, and whipped into foam the
      wavelets of the river which splashed noisily on the sandy shore, casting
      high their white crests, racing one after another into the dim distance,
      and leaping impetuously over one another’s shoulders. It seemed as
      if the river felt the proximity of winter, and was running at random away
      from the fetters of ice which the north wind might well have flung upon
      her that very night. The sky was heavy and dark; down from it swept
      incessantly scarcely visible drops of rain, and the melancholy elegy in
      nature all around me was emphasised by a couple of battered and misshapen
      willow-trees and a boat, bottom upwards, that was fastened to their roots.
    

      The overturned canoe with its battered keel and the miserable old trees
      rifled by the cold wind—everything around me was bankrupt, barren,
      and dead, and the sky flowed with undryable tears... Everything around was
      waste and gloomy ... it seemed as if everything were dead, leaving me
      alone among the living, and for me also a cold death waited.
    

      I was then eighteen years old—a good time!
    

      I walked and walked along the cold wet sand, making my chattering teeth
      warble in honour of cold and hunger, when suddenly, as I was carefully
      searching for something to eat behind one of the empty crates, I perceived
      behind it, crouching on the ground, a figure in woman’s clothes dank
      with the rain and clinging fast to her stooping shoulders. Standing over
      her, I watched to see what she was doing. It appeared that she was digging
      a trench in the sand with her hands—digging away under one of the
      crates.
    

      “Why are you doing that?” I asked, crouching down on my heels
      quite close to her.
    

      She gave a little scream and was quickly on her legs again. Now that she
      stood there staring at me, with her wide-open grey eyes full of terror, I
      perceived that it was a girl of my own age, with a very pleasant face
      embellished unfortunately by three large blue marks. This spoilt her,
      although these blue marks had been distributed with a remarkable sense of
      proportion, one at a time, and all were of equal size—two under the
      eyes, and one a little bigger on the forehead just over the bridge of the
      nose. This symmetry was evidently the work of an artist well inured to the
      business of spoiling the human physiognomy.
    

      The girl looked at me, and the terror in her eyes gradually died out...
      She shook the sand from her hands, adjusted her cotton head-gear, cowered
      down, and said:
    

      “I suppose you too want something to eat? Dig away then! My hands
      are tired. Over there”—she nodded her head in the direction of
      a booth—“there is bread for certain ... and sausages too...
      That booth is still carrying on business.”
    

      I began to dig. She, after waiting a little and looking at me, sat down
      beside me and began to help me.
    

      We worked in silence. I cannot say now whether I thought at that moment of
      the criminal code, of morality, of proprietorship, and all the other
      things about which, in the opinion of many experienced persons, one ought
      to think every moment of one’s life. Wishing to keep as close to the
      truth as possible, I must confess that apparently I was so deeply engaged
      in digging under the crate that I completely forgot about everything else
      except this one thing: What could be inside that crate?
    

      The evening drew on. The grey, mouldy, cold fog grew thicker and thicker
      around us. The waves roared with a hollower sound than before, and the
      rain pattered down on the boards of that crate more loudly and more
      frequently. Somewhere or other the night-watchman began springing his
      rattle.
    

      “Has it got a bottom or not?” softly inquired my assistant. I
      did not understand what she was talking about, and I kept silence.
    

      “I say, has the crate got a bottom? If it has we shall try in vain
      to break into it. Here we are digging a trench, and we may, after all,
      come upon nothing but solid boards. How shall we take them off? Better
      smash the lock; it is a wretched lock.”
    

      Good ideas rarely visit the heads of women, but, as you see, they do visit
      them sometimes. I have always valued good ideas, and have always tried to
      utilise them as far as possible.
    

      Having found the lock, I tugged at it and wrenched off the whole thing. My
      accomplice immediately stooped down and wriggled like a serpent into the
      gaping-open, four cornered cover of the crate whence she called to me
      approvingly, in a low tone:
    

      “You’re a brick!”
    

      Nowadays a little crumb of praise from a woman is dearer to me than a
      whole dithyramb from a man, even though he be more eloquent than all the
      ancient and modern orators put together. Then, however, I was less amiably
      disposed than I am now, and, paying no attention to the compliment of my
      comrade, I asked her curtly and anxiously:
    

      “Is there anything?”
    

      In a monotonous tone she set about calculating our discoveries.
    

      “A basketful of bottles—thick furs—a sunshade—an
      iron pail.”
    

      All this was uneatable. I felt that my hopes had vanished... But suddenly
      she exclaimed vivaciously:
    

      “Aha! here it is!”
    

      “What?”
    

      “Bread ... a loaf ... it’s only wet ... take it!”
    

      A loaf flew to my feet and after it herself, my valiant comrade. I had
      already bitten off a morsel, stuffed it in my mouth, and was chewing it...
    

      “Come, give me some too!... And we mustn’t stay here... Where
      shall we go?” she looked inquiringly about on all sides... It was
      dark, wet, and boisterous.
    

      “Look! there’s an upset canoe yonder ... let us go there.”
    

      “Let us go then!” And off we set, demolishing our booty as we
      went, and filling our mouths with large portions of it... The rain grew
      more violent, the river roared; from somewhere or other resounded a
      prolonged mocking whistle—just as if Someone great who feared nobody
      was whistling down all earthly institutions and along with them this
      horrid autumnal wind and us its heroes. This whistling made my heart throb
      painfully, in spite of which I greedily went on eating, and in this
      respect the girl, walking on my left hand, kept even pace with me.
    

      “What do they call you?” I asked her—why I know not.
    

      “Natasha,” she answered shortly, munching loudly.
    

      I stared at her. My heart ached within me; and then I stared into the mist
      before me, and it seemed to me as if the inimical countenance of my
      Destiny was smiling at me enigmatically and coldly.
    








      The rain scourged the timbers of the skiff incessantly, and its soft
      patter induced melancholy thoughts, and the wind whistled as it flew down
      into the boat’s battered bottom through a rift, where some loose
      splinters of wood were rattling together—a disquieting and
      depressing sound. The waves of the river were splashing on the shore, and
      sounded so monotonous and hopeless, just as if they were telling something
      unbearably dull and heavy, which was boring them into utter disgust,
      something from which they wanted to run away and yet were obliged to talk
      about all the same. The sound of the rain blended with their splashing,
      and a long-drawn sigh seemed to be floating above the overturned skiff—the
      endless, labouring sigh of the earth, injured and exhausted by the eternal
      changes from the bright and warm summer to the cold misty and damp autumn.
      The wind blew continually over the desolate shore and the foaming river—blew
      and sang its melancholy songs...
    

      Our position beneath the shelter of the skiff was utterly devoid of
      comfort; it was narrow and damp, tiny cold drops of rain dribbled through
      the damaged bottom; gusts of wind penetrated it. We sat in silence and
      shivered with cold. I remembered that I wanted to go to sleep. Natasha
      leaned her back against the hull of the boat and curled herself up into a
      tiny ball. Embracing her knees with her hands, and resting her chin upon
      them, she stared doggedly at the river with wide-open eyes; on the pale
      patch of her face they seemed immense, because of the blue marks below
      them. She never moved, and this immobility and silence—I felt it—gradually
      produced within me a terror of my neighbour. I wanted to talk to her, but
      I knew not how to begin.
    

      It was she herself who spoke.
    

      “What a cursed thing life is!” she exclaimed plainly,
      abstractedly, and in a tone of deep conviction.
    

      But this was no complaint. In these words there was too much of
      indifference for a complaint. This simple soul thought according to her
      understanding—thought and proceeded to form a certain conclusion
      which she expressed aloud, and which I could not confute for fear of
      contradicting myself. Therefore I was silent, and she, as if she had not
      noticed me, continued to sit there immovable.
    

      “Even if we croaked ... what then...?” Natasha began again,
      this time quietly and reflectively, and still there was not one note of
      complaint in her words. It was plain that this person, in the course of
      her reflections on life, was regarding her own case, and had arrived at
      the conviction that in order to preserve herself from the mockeries of
      life, she was not in a position to do anything else but simply “croak”—to
      use her own expression.
    

      The clearness of this line of thought was inexpressibly sad and painful to
      me, and I felt that if I kept silence any longer I was really bound to
      weep... And it would have been shameful to have done this before a woman,
      especially as she was not weeping herself. I resolved to speak to her.
    

      “Who was it that knocked you about?” I asked. For the moment I
      could not think of anything more sensible or more delicate.
    

      “Pashka did it all,” she answered in a dull and level tone.
    

      “And who is he?”
    

      “My lover... He was a baker.”
    

      “Did he beat you often?”
    

      “Whenever he was drunk he beat me... Often!”
    

      And suddenly, turning towards me, she began to talk about herself, Pashka,
      and their mutual relations. He was a baker with red moustaches and played
      very well on the banjo. He came to see her and greatly pleased her, for he
      was a merry chap and wore nice clean clothes. He had a vest which cost
      fifteen rubles and boots with dress tops. For these reasons she had fallen
      in love with him, and he became her “creditor.” And when he
      became her creditor he made it his business to take away from her the
      money which her other friends gave to her for bonbons, and, getting drunk
      on this money, he would fall to beating her; but that would have been
      nothing if he hadn’t also begun to “run after” other
      girls before her very eyes.
    

      “Now, wasn’t that an insult? I am not worse than the others.
      Of course that meant that he was laughing at me, the blackguard. The day
      before yesterday I asked leave of my mistress to go out for a bit, went to
      him, and there I found Dimka sitting beside him drunk. And he, too, was
      half seas over. I said, ‘You scoundrel, you!’ And he gave me a
      thorough hiding. He kicked me and dragged me by the hair. But that was
      nothing to what came after. He spoiled everything I had on—left me
      just as I am now! How could I appear before my mistress? He spoiled
      everything ... my dress and my jacket too—it was quite a new one; I
      gave a fiver for it ... and tore my kerchief from my head... Oh, Lord!
      What will become of me now?” she suddenly whined in a lamentable
      overstrained voice.
    

      The wind howled, and became ever colder and more boisterous... Again my
      teeth began to dance up and down, and she, huddled up to avoid the cold,
      pressed as closely to me as she could, so that I could see the gleam of
      her eyes through the darkness.
    

      “What wretches all you men are! I’d burn you all in an oven; I’d
      cut you in pieces. If any one of you was dying I’d spit in his
      mouth, and not pity him a bit. Mean skunks! You wheedle and wheedle, you
      wag your tails like cringing dogs, and we fools give ourselves up to you,
      and it’s all up with us! Immediately you trample us underfoot...
      Miserable loafers”
    

      She cursed us up and down, but there was no vigour, no malice, no hatred
      of these “miserable loafers” in her cursing that I could hear.
      The tone of her language by no means corresponded with its subject-matter,
      for it was calm enough, and the gamut of her voice was terribly poor.
    

      Yet all this made a stronger impression on me than the most eloquent and
      convincing pessimistic books and speeches, of which I had read a good many
      and which I still read to this day. And this, you see, was because the
      agony of a dying person is much more natural and violent than the most
      minute and picturesque descriptions of death.
    

      I felt really wretched—more from cold than from the words of my
      neighbour. I groaned softly and ground my teeth.
    

      Almost at the same moment I felt two little arms about me—one of
      them touched my neck and the other lay upon my face—and at the same
      time an anxious, gentle, friendly voice uttered the question:
    

      “What ails you?”
    

      I was ready to believe that some one else was asking me this and not
      Natasha, who had just declared that all men were scoundrels, and expressed
      a wish for their destruction. But she it was, and now she began speaking
      quickly, hurriedly.
    

      “What ails you, eh? Are you cold? Are you frozen? Ah, what a one you
      are, sitting there so silent like a little owl! Why, you should have told
      me long ago that you were cold. Come ... lie on the ground ... stretch
      yourself out and I will lie ... there! How’s that? Now put your arms
      round me?... tighter! How’s that? You shall be warm very soon now...
      And then we’ll lie back to back... The night will pass so quickly,
      see if it won’t. I say ... have you too been drinking?... Turned out
      of your place, eh?... It doesn’t matter.”
    

      And she comforted me... She encouraged me.
    

      May I be thrice accursed! What a world of irony was in this single fact
      for me! Just imagine! Here was I, seriously occupied at this very time
      with the destiny of humanity, thinking of the re-organisation of the
      social system, of political revolutions, reading all sorts of
      devilishly-wise books whose abysmal profundity was certainly unfathomable
      by their very authors—at this very time, I say, I was trying with
      all my might to make of myself “a potent active social force.”
      It even seemed to me that I had partially accomplished my object; anyhow,
      at this time, in my ideas about myself, I had got so far as to recognise
      that I had an exclusive right to exist, that I had the necessary greatness
      to deserve to live my life, and that I was fully competent to play a great
      historical part therein. And a woman was now warming me with her body, a
      wretched, battered, hunted creature, who had no place and no value in
      life, and whom I had never thought of helping till she helped me herself,
      and whom I really would not have known how to help in any way even if the
      thought of it had occurred to me.
    

      Ah! I was ready to think that all this was happening to me in a dream—in
      a disagreeable, an oppressive dream.
    

      But, ugh! it was impossible for me to think that, for cold drops of rain
      were dripping down upon me, the woman was pressing close to me, her warm
      breath was fanning my face, and—despite a slight odor of vodka—it
      did me good. The wind howled and raged, the rain smote upon the skiff, the
      waves splashed, and both of us, embracing each other convulsively,
      nevertheless shivered with cold. All this was only too real, and I am
      certain that nobody ever dreamed such an oppressive and horrid dream as
      that reality.
    

      But Natasha was talking all the time of something or other, talking kindly
      and sympathetically, as only women can talk. Beneath the influence of her
      voice and kindly words a little fire began to burn up within me, and
      something inside my heart thawed in consequence.
    

      Then tears poured from my eyes like a hailstorm, washing away from my
      heart much that was evil, much that was stupid, much sorrow and dirt which
      had fastened upon it before that night. Natasha comforted me.
    

      “Come, come, that will do, little one! Don’t take on! That’ll
      do! God will give you another chance ... you will right yourself and stand
      in your proper place again ... and it will be all right...”
    

      And she kept kissing me ... many kisses did she give me ... burning kisses
      ... and all for nothing...
    

      Those were the first kisses from a woman that had ever been bestowed upon
      me, and they were the best kisses too, for all the subsequent kisses cost
      me frightfully dear, and really gave me nothing at all in exchange.
    

      “Come, don’t take on so, funny one! I’ll manage for you
      to-morrow if you cannot find a place.” Her quiet persuasive
      whispering sounded in my ears as if it came through a dream...
    

      There we lay till dawn...
    

      And when the dawn came, we crept from behind the skiff and went into the
      town... Then we took friendly leave of each other and never met again,
      although for half a year I searched in every hole and corner for that kind
      Natasha, with whom I spent the autumn night just described.
    

      If she be already dead—and well for her if it were so—may she
      rest in peace! And if she be alive ... still I say “Peace to her
      soul!” And may the consciousness of her fall never enter her soul
      ... for that would be a superfluous and fruitless suffering if life is to
      be lived...
    











      HER LOVER
    

      BY MAXIM GORKY
    

An acquaintance of
      mine once told me the following story.
    

      When I was a student at Moscow I happened to live alongside one of those
      ladies whose repute is questionable. She was a Pole, and they called her
      Teresa. She was a tallish, powerfully-built brunette, with black, bushy
      eyebrows and a large coarse face as if carved out by a hatchet—the
      bestial gleam of her dark eyes, her thick bass voice, her cabman-like gait
      and her immense muscular vigour, worthy of a fishwife, inspired me with
      horror. I lived on the top flight and her garret was opposite to mine. I
      never left my door open when I knew her to be at home. But this, after
      all, was a very rare occurrence. Sometimes I chanced to meet her on the
      staircase or in the yard, and she would smile upon me with a smile which
      seemed to me to be sly and cynical. Occasionally, I saw her drunk, with
      bleary eyes, tousled hair, and a particularly hideous grin. On such
      occasions she would speak to me.
    

      “How d’ye do, Mr. Student!” and her stupid laugh would
      still further intensify my loathing of her. I should have liked to have
      changed my quarters in order to have avoided such encounters and
      greetings; but my little chamber was a nice one, and there was such a wide
      view from the window, and it was always so quiet in the street below—so
      I endured.
    

      And one morning I was sprawling on my couch, trying to find some sort of
      excuse for not attending my class, when the door opened, and the bass
      voice of Teresa the loathsome resounded from my threshold:
    

      “Good health to you, Mr. Student!”
    

      “What do you want?” I said. I saw that her face was confused
      and supplicatory... It was a very unusual sort of face for her.
    

      “Sir! I want to beg a favour of you. Will you grant it me?”
    

      I lay there silent, and thought to myself:
    

      “Gracious!... Courage, my boy!”
    

      “I want to send a letter home, that’s what it is,” she
      said; her voice was beseeching, soft, timid.
    

      “Deuce take you!” I thought; but up I jumped, sat down at my
      table, took a sheet of paper, and said:
    

      “Come here, sit down, and dictate!”
    

      She came, sat down very gingerly on a chair, and looked at me with a
      guilty look.
    

      “Well, to whom do you want to write?”
    

      “To Boleslav Kashput, at the town of Svieptziana, on the Warsaw
      Road...”
    

      “Well, fire away!”
    

      “My dear Boles ... my darling ... my faithful lover. May the Mother
      of God protect thee! Thou heart of gold, why hast thou not written for
      such a long time to thy sorrowing little dove, Teresa?”
    

      I very nearly burst out laughing. “A sorrowing little dove!”
      more than five feet high, with fists a stone and more in weight, and as
      black a face as if the little dove had lived all its life in a chimney,
      and had never once washed itself! Restraining myself somehow, I asked:
    

      “Who is this Bolest?”
    

      “Boles, Mr. Student,” she said, as if offended with me for
      blundering over the name, “he is Boles—my young man.”
    

      “Young man!”
    

      “Why are you so surprised, sir? Cannot I, a girl, have a young man?”
    

      She? A girl? Well!
    

      “Oh, why not?” I said. “All things are possible. And has
      he been your young man long?”
    

      “Six years.”
    

      “Oh, ho!” I thought. “Well, let us write your letter...”
    

      And I tell you plainly that I would willingly have changed places with
      this Boles if his fair correspondent had been not Teresa but something
      less than she.
    

      “I thank you most heartily, sir, for your kind services,” said
      Teresa to me, with a curtsey. “Perhaps I can show you
      some service, eh?”
    

      “No, I most humbly thank you all the same.”
    

      “Perhaps, sir, your shirts or your trousers may want a little
      mending?”
    

      I felt that this mastodon in petticoats had made me grow quite red with
      shame, and I told her pretty sharply that I had no need whatever of her
      services.
    

      She departed.
    

      A week or two passed away. It was evening. I was sitting at my window
      whistling and thinking of some expedient for enabling me to get away from
      myself. I was bored; the weather was dirty. I didn’t want to go out,
      and out of sheer ennui I began a course of self-analysis and reflection.
      This also was dull enough work, but I didn’t care about doing
      anything else. Then the door opened. Heaven be praised! Some one came in.
    

      “Oh, Mr. Student, you have no pressing business, I hope?”
    

      It was Teresa. Humph!
    

      “No. What is it?”
    

      “I was going to ask you, sir, to write me another letter.”
    

      “Very well! To Boles, eh?”
    

      “No, this time it is from him.”
    

      “Wha-at?”
    

      “Stupid that I am! It is not for me, Mr. Student, I beg your pardon.
      It is for a friend of mine, that is to say, not a friend but an
      acquaintance—a man acquaintance. He has a sweetheart just like me
      here, Teresa. That’s how it is. Will you, sir, write a letter to
      this Teresa?”
    

      I looked at her—her face was troubled, her fingers were trembling. I
      was a bit fogged at first—and then I guessed how it was.
    

      “Look here, my lady,” I said, “there are no Boleses or
      Teresas at all, and you’ve been telling me a pack of lies. Don’t
      you come sneaking about me any longer. I have no wish whatever to
      cultivate your acquaintance. Do you understand?”
    

      And suddenly she grew strangely terrified and distraught; she began to
      shift from foot to foot without moving from the place, and spluttered
      comically, as if she wanted to say something and couldn’t. I waited
      to see what would come of all this, and I saw and felt that, apparently, I
      had made a great mistake in suspecting her of wishing to draw me from the
      path of righteousness. It was evidently something very different.
    

      “Mr. Student!” she began, and suddenly, waving her hand, she
      turned abruptly towards the door and went out. I remained with a very
      unpleasant feeling in my mind. I listened. Her door was flung violently to—plainly
      the poor wench was very angry... I thought it over, and resolved to go to
      her, and, inviting her to come in here, write everything she wanted.
    

      I entered her apartment. I looked round. She was sitting at the table,
      leaning on her elbows, with her head in her hands.
    

      “Listen to me,” I said.
    

      Now, whenever I come to this point in my story, I always feel horribly
      awkward and idiotic. Well, well!
    

      “Listen to me,” I said.
    

      She leaped from her seat, came towards me with flashing eyes, and laying
      her hands on my shoulders, began to whisper, or rather to hum in her
      peculiar bass voice:
    

      “Look you, now! It’s like this. There’s no Boles at all,
      and there’s no Teresa either. But what’s that to you? Is it a
      hard thing for you to draw your pen over paper? Eh? Ah, and you,
      too! Still such a little fair-haired boy! There’s nobody at all,
      neither Boles, nor Teresa, only me. There you have it, and much good may
      it do you!”
    

      “Pardon me!” said I, altogether flabbergasted by such a
      reception, “what is it all about? There’s no Boles, you say?”
    

      “No. So it is.”
    

      “And no Teresa either?”
    

      “And no Teresa. I’m Teresa.”
    

      I didn’t understand it at all. I fixed my eyes upon her, and tried
      to make out which of us was taking leave of his or her senses. But she
      went again to the table, searched about for something, came back to me,
      and said in an offended tone:
    

      “If it was so hard for you to write to Boles, look, there’s
      your letter, take it! Others will write for me.”
    

      I looked. In her hand was my letter to Boles. Phew!
    

      “Listen, Teresa! What is the meaning of all this? Why must you get
      others to write for you when I have already written it, and you haven’t
      sent it?”
    

      “Sent it where?”
    

      “Why, to this—Boles.”
    

      “There’s no such person.”
    

      I absolutely did not understand it. There was nothing for me but to spit
      and go. Then she explained.
    

      “What is it?” she said, still offended. “There’s
      no such person, I tell you,” and she extended her arms as if she
      herself did not understand why there should be no such person. “But
      I wanted him to be... Am I then not a human creature like the rest of
      them? Yes, yes, I know, I know, of course... Yet no harm was done to any
      one by my writing to him that I can see...”
    

      “Pardon me—to whom?”
    

      “To Boles, of course.”
    

      “But he doesn’t exist.”
    

      “Alas! alas! But what if he doesn’t? He doesn’t exist,
      but he might! I write to him, and it looks as if he did exist. And
      Teresa—that’s me, and he replies to me, and then I write to
      him again...”
    

      I understood at last. And I felt so sick, so miserable, so ashamed,
      somehow. Alongside of me, not three yards away, lived a human creature who
      had nobody in the world to treat her kindly, affectionately, and this
      human being had invented a friend for herself!
    

      “Look, now! you wrote me a letter to Boles, and I gave it to some
      one else to read it to me; and when they read it to me I listened and
      fancied that Boles was there. And I asked you to write me a letter from
      Boles to Teresa—that is to me. When they write such a letter for me,
      and read it to me, I feel quite sure that Boles is there. And life grows
      easier for me in consequence.”
    

      “Deuce take you for a blockhead!” said I to myself when I
      heard this.
    

      And from thenceforth, regularly, twice a week, I wrote a letter to Boles,
      and an answer from Boles to Teresa. I wrote those answers well... She, of
      course, listened to them, and wept like anything, roared, I should say,
      with her bass voice. And in return for my thus moving her to tears by real
      letters from the imaginary Boles, she began to mend the holes I had in my
      socks, shirts, and other articles of clothing. Subsequently, about three
      months after this history began, they put her in prison for something or
      other. No doubt by this time she is dead.
    

      My acquaintance shook the ash from his cigarette, looked pensively up at
      the sky, and thus concluded:
    

      Well, well, the more a human creature has tasted of bitter things the more
      it hungers after the sweet things of life. And we, wrapped round in the
      rags of our virtues, and regarding others through the mist of our
      self-sufficiency, and persuaded of our universal impeccability, do not
      understand this.
    

      And the whole thing turns out pretty stupidly—and very cruelly. The
      fallen classes, we say. And who are the fallen classes, I should like to
      know? They are, first of all, people with the same bones, flesh, and blood
      and nerves as ourselves. We have been told this day after day for ages.
      And we actually listen—and the devil only knows how hideous the
      whole thing is. Or are we completely depraved by the loud sermonising of
      humanism? In reality, we also are fallen folks, and, so far as I can see,
      very deeply fallen into the abyss of self-sufficiency and the conviction
      of our own superiority. But enough of this. It is all as old as the hills—so
      old that it is a shame to speak of it. Very old indeed—yes, that’s
      what it is!
    











      LAZARUS
    

      BY LEONID ANDREYEV
    

      I
    

When Lazarus rose
      from the grave, after three days and nights in the mysterious thraldom of
      death, and returned alive to his home, it was a long time before any one
      noticed the evil peculiarities in him that were later to make his very
      name terrible. His friends and relatives were jubilant that he had come
      back to life. They surrounded him with tenderness, they were lavish of
      their eager attentions, spending the greatest care upon his food and drink
      and the new garments they made for him. They clad him gorgeously in the
      glowing colours of hope and laughter, and when, arrayed like a bridegroom,
      he sat at table with them again, ate again, and drank again, they wept
      fondly and summoned the neighbours to look upon the man miraculously
      raised from the dead.
    

      The neighbours came and were moved with joy. Strangers arrived from
      distant cities and villages to worship the miracle. They burst into stormy
      exclamations, and buzzed around the house of Mary and Martha, like so many
      bees.
    

      That which was new in Lazarus’ face and gestures they explained
      naturally, as the traces of his severe illness and the shock he had passed
      through. It was evident that the disintegration of the body had been
      halted by a miraculous power, but that the restoration had not been
      complete; that death had left upon his face and body the effect of an
      artist’s unfinished sketch seen through a thin glass. On his
      temples, under his eyes, and in the hollow of his cheek lay a thick,
      earthy blue. His fingers were blue, too, and under his nails, which had
      grown long in the grave, the blue had turned livid. Here and there on his
      lips and body, the skin, blistered in the grave, had burst open and left
      reddish glistening cracks, as if covered with a thin, glassy slime. And he
      had grown exceedingly stout. His body was horribly bloated and suggested
      the fetid, damp smell of putrefaction. But the cadaverous, heavy odour
      that clung to his burial garments and, as it seemed, to his very body,
      soon wore off, and after some time the blue of his hands and face
      softened, and the reddish cracks of his skin smoothed out, though they
      never disappeared completely. Such was the aspect of Lazarus in his second
      life. It looked natural only to those who had seen him buried.
    

      Not merely Lazarus’ face, but his very character, it seemed, had
      changed; though it astonished no one and did not attract the attention it
      deserved. Before his death Lazarus had been cheerful and careless, a lover
      of laughter and harmless jest. It was because of his good humour, pleasant
      and equable, his freedom from meanness and gloom, that he had been so
      beloved by the Master. Now he was grave and silent; neither he himself
      jested nor did he laugh at the jests of others; and the words he spoke
      occasionally were simple, ordinary and necessary words—words as much
      devoid of sense and depth as are the sounds with which an animal expresses
      pain and pleasure, thirst and hunger. Such words a man may speak all his
      life and no one would ever know the sorrows and joys that dwelt within
      him.
    

      Thus it was that Lazarus sat at the festive table among his friends and
      relatives—his face the face of a corpse over which, for three days,
      death had reigned in darkness, his garments gorgeous and festive,
      glittering with gold, bloody-red and purple; his mien heavy and silent. He
      was horribly changed and strange, but as yet undiscovered. In high waves,
      now mild, now stormy, the festivities went on around him. Warm glances of
      love caressed his face, still cold with the touch of the grave; and a
      friend’s warm hand patted his bluish, heavy hand. And the music
      played joyous tunes mingled of the sounds of the tympanum, the pipe, the
      zither and the dulcimer. It was as if bees were humming, locusts buzzing
      and birds singing over the happy home of Mary and Martha.
    

      II
    

Some one recklessly
      lifted the veil. By one breath of an uttered word he destroyed the serene
      charm, and uncovered the truth in its ugly nakedness. No thought was
      clearly defined in his mind, when his lips smilingly asked: “Why do
      you not tell us, Lazarus, what was There?” And all became silent,
      struck with the question. Only now it seemed to have occurred to them that
      for three days Lazarus had been dead; and they looked with curiosity,
      awaiting an answer. But Lazarus remained silent.
    

      “You will not tell us?” wondered the inquirer. “Is it so
      terrible There?”
    

      Again his thought lagged behind his words. Had it preceded them, he would
      not have asked the question, for, at the very moment he uttered it, his
      heart sank with a dread fear. All grew restless; they awaited the words of
      Lazarus anxiously. But he was silent, cold and severe, and his eyes were
      cast down. And now, as if for the first time, they perceived the horrible
      bluishness of his face and the loathsome corpulence of his body. On the
      table, as if forgotten by Lazarus, lay his livid blue hand, and all eyes
      were riveted upon it, as though expecting the desired answer from that
      hand. The musicians still played; then silence fell upon them, too, and
      the gay sounds died down, as scattered coals are extinguished by water.
      The pipe became mute, and the ringing tympanum and the murmuring dulcimer;
      and as though a chord were broken, as though song itself were dying, the
      zither echoed a trembling broken sound. Then all was quiet.
    

      “You will not?” repeated the inquirer, unable to restrain his
      babbling tongue. Silence reigned, and the livid blue hand lay motionless.
      It moved slightly, and the company sighed with relief and raised their
      eyes. Lazarus, risen from the dead, was looking straight at them,
      embracing all with one glance, heavy and terrible.
    

      This was on the third day after Lazarus had arisen from the grave. Since
      then many had felt that his gaze was the gaze of destruction, but neither
      those who had been forever crushed by it, nor those who in the prime of
      life (mysterious even as death) had found the will to resist his glance,
      could ever explain the terror that lay immovable in the depths of his
      black pupils. He looked quiet and simple. One felt that he had no
      intention to hide anything, but also no intention to tell anything. His
      look was cold, as of one who is entirely indifferent to all that is alive.
      And many careless people who pressed around him, and did not notice him,
      later learned with wonder and fear the name of this stout, quiet man who
      brushed against them with his sumptuous, gaudy garments. The sun did not
      stop shining when he looked, neither did the fountain cease playing, and
      the Eastern sky remained cloudless and blue as always; but the man who
      fell under his inscrutable gaze could no longer feel the sun, nor hear the
      fountain, nor recognise his native sky. Sometimes he would cry bitterly,
      sometimes tear his hair in despair and madly call for help; but generally
      it happened that the men thus stricken by the gaze of Lazarus began to
      fade away listlessly and quietly and pass into a slow death lasting many
      long years. They died in the presence of everybody, colourless, haggard
      and gloomy, like trees withering on rocky ground. Those who screamed in
      madness sometimes came back to life; but the others, never.
    

      “So you will not tell us, Lazarus, what you saw There?” the
      inquirer repeated for the third time. But now his voice was dull, and a
      dead, grey weariness looked stupidly from out his eyes. The faces of all
      present were also covered by the same dead grey weariness like a mist. The
      guests stared at one another stupidly, not knowing why they had come
      together or why they sat around this rich table. They stopped talking, and
      vaguely felt it was time to leave; but they could not overcome the
      lassitude that spread through their muscles. So they continued to sit
      there, each one isolated, like little dim lights scattered in the darkness
      of night.
    

      The musicians were paid to play, and they again took up the instruments,
      and again played gay or mournful airs. But it was music made to order,
      always the same tunes, and the guests listened wonderingly. Why was this
      music necessary, they thought, why was it necessary and what good did it
      do for people to pull at strings and blow their cheeks into thin pipes,
      and produce varied and strange-sounding noises?
    

      “How badly they play!” said some one.
    

      The musicians were insulted and left. Then the guests departed one by one,
      for it was nearing night. And when the quiet darkness enveloped them, and
      it became easier to breathe, the image of Lazarus suddenly arose before
      each one in stern splendour. There he stood, with the blue face of a
      corpse and the raiment of a bridegroom, sumptuous and resplendent, in his
      eyes that cold stare in the depths of which lurked The Horrible!
      They stood still as if turned into stone. The darkness surrounded them,
      and in the midst of this darkness flamed up the horrible apparition, the
      supernatural vision, of the one who for three days had lain under the
      measureless power of death. Three days he had been dead. Thrice had the
      sun risen and set—and he had lain dead. The children had played, the
      water had murmured as it streamed over the rocks, the hot dust had clouded
      the highway—and he had been dead. And now he was among men again—touched
      them—looked at them—looked at them! And through the
      black rings of his pupils, as through dark glasses, the unfathomable There
      gazed upon humanity.
    

      III
    

No one took care of
      Lazarus, and no friends or kindred remained with him. Only the great
      desert, enfolding the Holy City, came close to the threshold of his abode.
      It entered his home, and lay down on his couch like a spouse, and put out
      all the fires. No one cared for Lazarus. One after the other went away,
      even his sisters, Mary and Martha. For a long while Martha did not want to
      leave him, for she knew not who would nurse him or take care of him; and
      she cried and prayed. But one night, when the wind was roaming about the
      desert, and the rustling cypress trees were bending over the roof, she
      dressed herself quietly, and quietly went away. Lazarus probably heard how
      the door was slammed—it had not shut properly and the wind kept
      knocking it continually against the post—but he did not rise, did
      not go out, did not try to find out the reason. And the whole night until
      the morning the cypress trees hissed over his head, and the door swung to
      and fro, allowing the cold, greedily prowling desert to enter his
      dwelling. Everybody shunned him as though he were a leper. They wanted to
      put a bell on his neck to avoid meeting him. But some one, turning pale,
      remarked it would be terrible if at night, under the windows, one should
      happen to hear Lazarus’ bell, and all grew pale and assented.
    

      Since he did nothing for himself, he would probably have starved had not
      his neighbours, in trepidation, saved some food for him. Children brought
      it to him. They did not fear him, neither did they laugh at him in the
      innocent cruelty in which children often laugh at unfortunates. They were
      indifferent to him, and Lazarus showed the same indifference to them. He
      showed no desire to thank them for their services; he did not try to pat
      the dark hands and look into the simple shining little eyes. Abandoned to
      the ravages of time and the desert, his house was falling to ruins, and
      his hungry, bleating goats had long been scattered among his neighbours.
      His wedding garments had grown old. He wore them without changing them, as
      he had donned them on that happy day when the musicians played. He did not
      see the difference between old and new, between torn and whole. The
      brilliant colours were burnt and faded; the vicious dogs of the city and
      the sharp thorns of the desert had rent the fine clothes to shreds.
    

      During the day, when the sun beat down mercilessly upon all living things,
      and even the scorpions hid under the stones, convulsed with a mad desire
      to sting, he sat motionless in the burning rays, lifting high his blue
      face and shaggy wild beard.
    

      While yet the people were unafraid to speak to him, same one had asked
      him: “Poor Lazarus! Do you find it pleasant to sit so, and look at
      the sun?” And he answered: “Yes, it is pleasant.”
    

      The thought suggested itself to people that the cold of the three days in
      the grave had been so intense, its darkness so deep, that there was not in
      all the earth enough heat or light to warm Lazarus and lighten the gloom
      of his eyes; and inquirers turned away with a sigh.
    

      And when the setting sun, flat and purple-red, descended to earth, Lazarus
      went into the desert and walked straight toward it, as though intending to
      reach it. Always he walked directly toward the sun, and those who tried to
      follow him and find out what he did at night in the desert had indelibly
      imprinted upon their mind’s vision the black silhouette of a tall,
      stout man against the red background of an immense disk. The horrors of
      the night drove them away, and so they never found out what Lazarus did in
      the desert; but the image of the black form against the red was burned
      forever into their brains. Like an animal with a cinder in its eye which
      furiously rubs its muzzle against its paws, they foolishly rubbed their
      eyes; but the impression left by Lazarus was ineffaceable, forgotten only
      in death.
    

      There were people living far away who never saw Lazarus and only heard of
      him. With an audacious curiosity which is stronger than fear and feeds on
      fear, with a secret sneer in their hearts, some of them came to him one
      day as he basked in the sun, and entered into conversation with him. At
      that time his appearance had changed for the better and was not so
      frightful. At first the visitors snapped their fingers and thought
      disapprovingly of the foolish inhabitants of the Holy City. But when the
      short talk came to an end and they went home, their expression was such
      that the inhabitants of the Holy City at once knew their errand and said:
      “Here go some more madmen at whom Lazarus has looked.” The
      speakers raised their hands in silent pity.
    

      Other visitors came, among them brave warriors in cFlinking armour, who
      knew not fear, and happy youths who made merry with laughter and song.
      Busy merchants, jingling their coins, ran in for awhile, and proud
      attendants at the Temple placed their staffs at Lazarus’ door. But
      no one returned the same as he came. A frightful shadow fell upon their
      souls, and gave a new appearance to the old familiar world.
    

      Those who felt any desire to speak, after they had been stricken by the
      gaze of Lazarus, described the change that had come over them somewhat
      like this:
    

All objects seen by the eye and palpable to the hand became empty,
      light and transparent, as though they were light shadows in the darkness;
      and this darkness enveloped the whole universe. It was dispelled neither
      by the sun, nor by the moon, nor by the stars, but embraced the earth like
      a mother, and clothed it in a boundless black veil.
    

Into all bodies it penetrated, even into iron and stone; and the
      particles of the body lost their unity and became lonely. Even to the
      heart of the particles it penetrated, and the particles of the particles
      became lonely.
    

The vast emptiness which surrounds the universe, was not filled with
      things seen, with sun or moon or stars; it stretched boundless,
      penetrating everywhere, disuniting everything, body from body, particle
      from particle.
    

In emptiness the trees spread their roots, themselves empty; in
      emptiness rose phantom temples, palaces and houses—all empty; and in
      the emptiness moved restless Man, himself empty and light, like a shadow.
    

There was no more a sense of time; the beginning of all things and
      their end merged into one. In the very moment when a building was being
      erected and one could hear the builders striking with their hammers, one
      seemed already to see its ruins, and then emptiness where the ruins were.
    

A man was just born, and funeral candles were already lighted at his
      head, and then were extinguished; and soon there was emptiness where
      before had been the man and the candles.


And surrounded by Darkness and Empty Waste, Man trembled hopelessly
      before the dread of the Infinite.
    

      So spoke those who had a desire to speak. But much more could probably
      have been told by those who did not want to talk, and who died in silence.
    

      IV
    

At that time there
      lived in Rome a celebrated sculptor by the name of Aurelius. Out of clay,
      marble and bronze he created forms of gods and men of such beauty that
      this beauty was proclaimed immortal. But he himself was not satisfied, and
      said there was a supreme beauty that he had never succeeded in expressing
      in marble or bronze. “I have not yet gathered the radiance of the
      moon,” he said; “I have not yet caught the glare of the sun.
      There is no soul in my marble, there is no life in my beautiful bronze.”
      And when by moonlight he would slowly wander along the roads, crossing the
      black shadows of the cypress-trees, his white tunic flashing in the
      moonlight, those he met used to laugh good-naturedly and say: “Is it
      moonlight that you are gathering, Aurelius? Why did you not bring some
      baskets along?”
    

      And he, too, would laugh and point to his eyes and say: “Here are
      the baskets in which I gather the light of the moon and the radiance of
      the sun.”
    

      And that was the truth. In his eyes shone moon and sun. But he could not
      transmit the radiance to marble. Therein lay the greatest tragedy of his
      life. He was a descendant of an ancient race of patricians, had a good
      wife and children, and except in this one respect, lacked nothing.
    

      When the dark rumour about Lazarus reached him, he consulted his wife and
      friends and decided to make the long voyage to Judea, in order that he
      might look upon the man miraculously raised from the dead. He felt lonely
      in those days and hoped on the way to renew his jaded energies. What they
      told him about Lazarus did not frighten him. He had meditated much upon
      death. He did not like it, nor did he like those who tried to harmonise it
      with life. On this side, beautiful life; on the other, mysterious death,
      he reasoned, and no better lot could befall a man than to live—to
      enjoy life and the beauty of living. And he already had conceived a desire
      to convince Lazarus of the truth of this view and to return his soul to
      life even as his body had been returned. This task did not appear
      impossible, for the reports about Lazarus, fearsome and strange as they
      were, did not tell the whole truth about him, but only carried a vague
      warning against something awful.
    

      Lazarus was getting up from a stone to follow in the path of the setting
      sun, on the evening when the rich Roman, accompanied by an armed slave,
      approached him, and in a ringing voice called to him: “Lazarus!”
    

      Lazarus saw a proud and beautiful face, made radiant by fame, and white
      garments and precious jewels shining in the sunlight. The ruddy rays of
      the sun lent to the head and face a likeness to dimly shining bronze—that
      was what Lazarus saw. He sank back to his seat obediently, and wearily
      lowered his eyes.
    

      “It is true you are not beautiful, my poor Lazarus,” said the
      Roman quietly, playing with his gold chain. “You are even frightful,
      my poor friend; and death was not lazy the day when you so carelessly fell
      into its arms. But you are as fat as a barrel, and ‘Fat people are
      not bad,’ as the great CÃ¦sar said. I do not understand why people
      are so afraid of you. You will permit me to stay with you over night? It
      is already late, and I have no abode.”
    

      Nobody had ever asked Lazarus to be allowed to pass the night with him.
    

      “I have no bed,” said he.
    

      “I am somewhat of a warrior and can sleep sitting,” replied
      the Roman. “We shall make a light.”
    

      “I have no light.”
    

      “Then we will converse in the darkness like two friends. I suppose
      you have some wine?”
    

      “I have no wine.”
    

      The Roman laughed.
    

      “Now I understand why you are so gloomy and why you do not like your
      second life. No wine? Well, we shall do without. You know there are words
      that go to one’s head even as Falernian wine.”
    

      With a motion of his head he dismissed the slave, and they were alone. And
      again the sculptor spoke, but it seemed as though the sinking sun had
      penetrated into his words. They faded, pale and empty, as if trembling on
      weak feet, as if slipping and falling, drunk with the wine of anguish and
      despair. And black chasms appeared between the two men—like remote
      hints of vast emptiness and vast darkness.
    

      “Now I am your guest and you will not ill-treat me, Lazarus!”
      said the Roman. “Hospitality is binding even upon those who have
      been three days dead. Three days, I am told, you were in the grave. It
      must have been cold there... and it is from there that you have brought
      this bad habit of doing without light and wine. I like a light. It gets
      dark so quickly here. Your eyebrows and forehead have an interesting line:
      even as the ruins of castles covered with the ashes of an earthquake. But
      why in such strange, ugly clothes? I have seen the bridegrooms of your
      country, they wear clothes like that—such ridiculous clothes—such
      awful garments... Are you a bridegroom?”
    

      Already the sun had disappeared. A gigantic black shadow was approaching
      fast from the west, as if prodigious bare feet were rustling over the
      sand. And the chill breezes stole up behind.
    

      “In the darkness you seem even bigger, Lazarus, as though you had
      grown stouter in these few minutes. Do you feed on darkness, perchance?...
      And I would like a light... just a small light... just a small light. And
      I am cold. The nights here are so barbarously cold... If it were not so
      dark, I should say you were looking at me, Lazarus. Yes, it seems, you are
      looking. You are looking. You are looking at me!... I feel it—now
      you are smiling.”
    

      The night had come, and a heavy blackness filled the air.
    

      “How good it will be when the sun rises again to-morrow... You know
      I am a great sculptor... so my friends call me. I create, yes, they say I
      create, but for that daylight is necessary. I give life to cold marble. I
      melt the ringing bronze in the fire, in a bright, hot fire. Why did you
      touch me with your hand?”
    

      “Come,” said Lazarus, “you are my guest.” And they
      went into the house. And the shadows of the long evening fell on the
      earth...
    

      The slave at last grew tired waiting for his master, and when the sun
      stood high he came to the house. And he saw, directly under its burning
      rays, Lazarus and his master sitting close together. They looked straight
      up and were silent.
    

      The slave wept and cried aloud: “Master, what ails you, Master!”
    

      The same day Aurelius left for Rome. The whole way he was thoughtful and
      silent, attentively examining everything, the people, the ship, and the
      sea, as though endeavouring to recall something. On the sea a great storm
      overtook them, and all the while Aurelius remained on deck and gazed
      eagerly at the approaching and falling waves. When he reached home his
      family were shocked at the terrible change in his demeanour, but he calmed
      them with the words: “I have found it!”
    

      In the dusty clothes which he had worn during the entire journey and had
      not changed, he began his work, and the marble ringingly responded to the
      resounding blows of the hammer. Long and eagerly he worked, admitting no
      one. At last, one morning, he announced that the work was ready, and gave
      instructions that all his friends, and the severe critics and judges of
      art, be called together. Then he donned gorgeous garments, shining with
      gold, glowing with the purple of the byssin.
    

      “Here is what I have created,” he said thoughtfully.
    

      His friends looked, and immediately the shadow of deep sorrow covered
      their faces. It was a thing monstrous, possessing none of the forms
      familiar to the eye, yet not devoid of a hint of some new unknown form. On
      a thin tortuous little branch, or rather an ugly likeness of one, lay
      crooked, strange, unsightly, shapeless heaps of something turned outside
      in, or something turned inside out—wild fragments which seemed to be
      feebly trying to get away from themselves. And, accidentally, under one of
      the wild projections, they noticed a wonderfully sculptured butterfly,
      with transparent wings, trembling as though with a weak longing to fly.
    

      “Why that wonderful butterfly, Aurelius?” timidly asked some
      one.
    

      “I do not know,” answered the sculptor.
    

      The truth had to be told, and one of his friends, the one who loved
      Aurelius best, said: “This is ugly, my poor friend. It must be
      destroyed. Give me the hammer.” And with two blows he destroyed the
      monstrous mass, leaving only the wonderfully sculptured butterfly.
    

      After that Aurelius created nothing. He looked with absolute indifference
      at marble and at bronze and at his own divine creations, in which dwelt
      immortal beauty. In the hope of breathing into him once again the old
      flame of inspiration, with the idea of awakening his dead soul, his
      friends led him to see the beautiful creations of others, but he remained
      indifferent and no smile warmed his closed lips. And only after they spoke
      to him much and long of beauty, he would reply wearily:
    

      “But all this is—a lie.”
    

      And in the daytime, when the sun was shining, he would go into his rich
      and beautifully laid-out garden, and finding a place where there was no
      shadow, would expose his bare head and his dull eyes to the glitter and
      burning heat of the sun. Red and white butterflies fluttered around; down
      into the marble cistern ran splashing water from the crooked mouth of a
      blissfully drunken Satyr; but he sat motionless, like a pale shadow of
      that other one who, in a far land, at the very gates of the stony desert,
      also sat motionless under the fiery sun.
    

      V
    

And it came about
      finally that Lazarus was summoned to Rome by the great Augustus.
    

      They dressed him in gorgeous garments as though it had been ordained that
      he was to remain a bridegroom to an unknown bride until the very day of
      his death. It was as if an old coffin, rotten and falling apart, were
      regilded over and over, and gay tassels were hung on it. And solemnly they
      conducted him in gala attire, as though in truth it were a bridal
      procession, the runners loudly sounding the trumpet that the way be made
      for the ambassadors of the Emperor. But the roads along which he passed
      were deserted. His entire native land cursed the execrable name of
      Lazarus, the man miraculously brought to life, and the people scattered at
      the mere report of his horrible approach. The trumpeters blew lonely
      blasts, and only the desert answered with a dying echo.
    

      Then they carried him across the sea on the saddest and most gorgeous ship
      that was ever mirrored in the azure waves of the Mediterranean. There were
      many people aboard, but the ship was silent and still as a coffin, and the
      water seemed to moan as it parted before the short curved prow. Lazarus
      sat lonely, baring his head to the sun, and listening in silence to the
      splashing of the waters. Further away the seamen and the ambassadors
      gathered like a crowd of distressed shadows. If a thunderstorm had
      happened to burst upon them at that time or the wind had overwhelmed the
      red sails, the ship would probably have perished, for none of those who
      were on her had strength or desire enough to fight for life. With supreme
      effort some went to the side of the ship and eagerly gazed at the blue,
      transparent abyss. Perhaps they imagined they saw a naiad flashing a pink
      shoulder through the waves, or an insanely joyous and drunken centaur
      galloping by, splashing up the water with his hoofs. But the sea was
      deserted and mute, and so was the watery abyss.
    

      Listlessly Lazarus set foot on the streets of the Eternal City, as though
      all its riches, all the majesty of its gigantic edifices, all the lustre
      and beauty and music of refined life, were simply the echo of the wind in
      the desert, or the misty images of hot running sand. Chariots whirled by;
      the crowd of strong, beautiful, haughty men passed on, builders of the
      Eternal City and proud partakers of its life; songs rang out; fountains
      laughed; pearly laughter of women filled the air, while the drunkard
      philosophised and the sober ones smilingly listened; horseshoes rattled on
      the pavement. And surrounded on all sides by glad sounds, a fat, heavy man
      moved through the centre of the city like a cold spot of silence, sowing
      in his path grief, anger and vague, carking distress. Who dared to be sad
      in Rome? indignantly demanded frowning citizens; and in two days the
      swift-tongued Rome knew of Lazarus, the man miraculously raised from the
      grave, and timidly evaded him.
    

      There were many brave men ready to try their strength, and at their
      senseless call Lazarus came obediently. The Emperor was so engrossed with
      state affairs that he delayed receiving the visitor, and for seven days
      Lazarus moved among the people.
    

      A jovial drunkard met him with a smile on his red lips. “Drink,
      Lazarus, drink!” he cried, “Would not Augustus laugh to see
      you drink!” And naked, besotted women laughed, and decked the blue
      hands of Lazarus with rose-leaves. But the drunkard looked into the eyes
      of Lazarus—and his joy ended forever. Thereafter he was always
      drunk. He drank no more, but was drunk all the time, shadowed by fearful
      dreams, instead of the joyous reveries that wine gives. Fearful dreams
      became the food of his broken spirit. Fearful dreams held him day and
      night in the mists of monstrous fantasy, and death itself was no more
      fearful than the apparition of its fierce precursor.
    

      Lazarus came to a youth and his lass who loved each other and were
      beautiful in their love. Proudly and strongly holding in his arms his
      beloved one, the youth said, with gentle pity: “Look at us, Lazarus,
      and rejoice with us. Is there anything stronger than love?”
    

      And Lazarus looked at them. And their whole life they continued to love
      one another, but their love became mournful and gloomy, even as those
      cypress trees over the tombs that feed their roots on the putrescence of
      the grave, and strive in vain in the quiet evening hour to touch the sky
      with their pointed tops. Hurled by fathomless life-forces into each other’s
      arms, they mingled their kisses with tears, their joy with pain, and only
      succeeded in realising the more vividly a sense of their slavery to the
      silent Nothing. Forever united, forever parted, they flashed like sparks,
      and like sparks went out in boundless darkness.
    

      Lazarus came to a proud sage, and the sage said to him: “I already
      know all the horrors that you may tell me, Lazarus. With what else can you
      terrify me?”
    

      Only a few moments passed before the sage realised that the knowledge of
      the horrible is not the horrible, and that the sight of death is not
      death. And he felt that in the eyes of the Infinite wisdom and folly are
      the same, for the Infinite knows them not. And the boundaries between
      knowledge and ignorance, between truth and falsehood, between top and
      bottom, faded and his shapeless thought was suspended in emptiness. Then
      he grasped his grey head in his hands and cried out insanely: “I
      cannot think! I cannot think!”
    

      Thus it was that under the cool gaze of Lazarus, the man miraculously
      raised from the dead, all that serves to affirm life, its sense and its
      joys, perished. And people began to say it was dangerous to allow him to
      see the Emperor; that it were better to kill him and bury him secretly,
      and swear he had disappeared. Swords were sharpened and youths devoted to
      the welfare of the people announced their readiness to become assassins,
      when Augustus upset the cruel plans by demanding that Lazarus appear
      before him.
    

      Even though Lazarus could not be kept away, it was felt that the heavy
      impression conveyed by his face might be somewhat softened. With that end
      in view expert painters, barbers and artists were secured who worked the
      whole night on Lazarus’ head. His beard was trimmed and curled. The
      disagreeable and deadly bluishness of his hands and face was covered up
      with paint; his hands were whitened, his cheeks rouged. The disgusting
      wrinkles of suffering that ridged his old face were patched up and
      painted, and on the smooth surface, wrinkles of good-nature and laughter,
      and of pleasant, good-humoured cheeriness, were laid on artistically with
      fine brushes.
    

      Lazarus submitted indifferently to all they did with him, and soon was
      transformed into a stout, nice-looking old man, for all the world a quiet
      and good-humoured grandfather of numerous grandchildren. He looked as
      though the smile with which he told funny stories had not left his lips,
      as though a quiet tenderness still lay hidden in the corner of his eyes.
      But the wedding-dress they did not dare to take off; and they could not
      change his eyes—the dark, terrible eyes from out of which stared the
      incomprehensible There.
    

      VI
    

Lazarus was
      untouched by the magnificence of the imperial apartments. He remained
      stolidly indifferent, as though he saw no contrast between his ruined
      house at the edge of the desert and the solid, beautiful palace of stone.
      Under his feet the hard marble of the floor took on the semblance of the
      moving sands of the desert, and to his eyes the throngs of gaily dressed,
      haughty men were as unreal as the emptiness of the air. They looked not
      into his face as he passed by, fearing to come under the awful bane of his
      eyes; but when the sound of his heavy steps announced that he had passed,
      heads were lifted, and eyes examined with timid curiosity the figure of
      the corpulent, tall, slightly stooping old man, as he slowly passed into
      the heart of the imperial palace. If death itself had appeared men would
      not have feared it so much; for hitherto death had been known to the dead
      only, and life to the living only, and between these two there had been no
      bridge. But this strange being knew death, and that knowledge of his was
      felt to be mysterious and cursed. “He will kill our great, divine
      Augustus,” men cried with horror, and they hurled curses after him.
      Slowly and stolidly he passed them by, penetrating ever deeper into the
      palace.
    

      Caesar knew already who Lazarus was, and was prepared to meet him. He was
      a courageous man; he felt his power was invincible, and in the fateful
      encounter with the man “wonderfully raised from the dead” he
      refused to lean on other men’s weak help. Man to man, face to face,
      he met Lazarus.
    

      “Do not fix your gaze on me, Lazarus,” he commanded. “I
      have heard that your head is like the head of Medusa, and turns into stone
      all upon whom you look. But I should like to have a close look at you, and
      to talk to you before I turn into stone,” he added in a spirit of
      playfulness that concealed his real misgivings.
    

      Approaching him, he examined closely Lazarus’ face and his strange
      festive clothes. Though his eyes were sharp and keen, he was deceived by
      the skilful counterfeit.
    

      “Well, your appearance is not terrible, venerable sir. But all the
      worse for men, when the terrible takes on such a venerable and pleasant
      appearance. Now let us talk.”
    

      Augustus sat down, and as much by glance as by words began the discussion.
      “Why did you not salute me when you entered?”
    

      Lazarus answered indifferently: “I did not know it was necessary.”
    

      “You are a Christian?”
    

      “No.”
    

      Augustus nodded approvingly. “That is good. I do not like the
      Christians. They shake the tree of life, forbidding it to bear fruit, and
      they scatter to the wind its fragrant blossoms. But who are you?”
    

      With some effort Lazarus answered: “I was dead.”
    

      “I heard about that. But who are you now?”
    

      Lazarus’ answer came slowly. Finally he said again, listlessly and
      indistinctly: “I was dead.”
    

      “Listen to me, stranger,” said the Emperor sharply, giving
      expression to what had been in his mind before. “My empire is an
      empire of the living; my people are a people of the living and not of the
      dead. You are superfluous here. I do not know who you are, I do not know
      what you have seen There, but if you lie, I hate your lies, and if you
      tell the truth, I hate your truth. In my heart I feel the pulse of life;
      in my hands I feel power, and my proud thoughts, like eagles, fly through
      space. Behind my back, under the protection of my authority, under the
      shadow of the laws I have created, men live and labour and rejoice. Do you
      hear this divine harmony of life? Do you hear the war cry that men hurl
      into the face of the future, challenging it to strife?”
    

      Augustus extended his arms reverently and solemnly cried out: “Blessed
      art thou, Great Divine Life!”
    

      But Lazarus was silent, and the Emperor continued more severely: “You
      are not wanted here. Pitiful remnant, half devoured of death, you fill men
      with distress and aversion to life. Like a caterpillar on the fields, you
      are gnawing away at the full seed of joy, exuding the slime of despair and
      sorrow. Your truth is like a rusted sword in the hands of a night
      assassin, and I shall condemn you to death as an assassin. But first I
      want to look into your eyes. Mayhap only cowards fear them, and brave men
      are spurred on to struggle and victory. Then will you merit not death but
      a reward. Look at me, Lazarus.”
    

      At first it seemed to divine Augustus as if a friend were looking at him,
      so soft, so alluring, so gently fascinating was the gaze of Lazarus. It
      promised not horror but quiet rest, and the Infinite dwelt there as a fond
      mistress, a compassionate sister, a mother. And ever stronger grew its
      gentle embrace, until he felt, as it were, the breath of a mouth hungry
      for kisses... Then it seemed as if iron bones protruded in a ravenous
      grip, and closed upon him in an iron band; and cold nails touched his
      heart, and slowly, slowly sank into it.
    

      “It pains me,” said divine Augustus, growing pale; “but
      look, Lazarus, look!”
    

      Ponderous gates, shutting off eternity, appeared to be slowly swinging
      open, and through the growing aperture poured in, coldly and calmly, the
      awful horror of the Infinite. Boundless Emptiness and Boundless Gloom
      entered like two shadows, extinguishing the sun, removing the ground from
      under the feet, and the cover from over the head. And the pain in his icy
      heart ceased.
    

      “Look at me, look at me, Lazarus!” commanded Augustus,
      staggering...
    

      Time ceased and the beginning of things came perilously near to the end.
      The throne of Augustus, so recently erected, fell to pieces, and emptiness
      took the place of the throne and of Augustus. Rome fell silently into
      ruins. A new city rose in its place, and it too was erased by emptiness.
      Like phantom giants, cities, kingdoms, and countries swiftly fell and
      disappeared into emptiness—swallowed up in the black maw of the
      Infinite...
    

      “Cease,” commanded the Emperor. Already the accent of
      indifference was in his voice. His arms hung powerless, and his eagle eyes
      flashed and were dimmed again, struggling against overwhelming darkness.
    

      “You have killed me, Lazarus,” he said drowsily.
    

      These words of despair saved him. He thought of the people, whose shield
      he was destined to be, and a sharp, redeeming pang pierced his dull heart.
      He thought of them doomed to perish, and he was filled with anguish. First
      they seemed bright shadows in the gloom of the Infinite.—How
      terrible! Then they appeared as fragile vessels with life-agitated blood,
      and hearts that knew both sorrow and great joy.—And he thought of
      them with tenderness.
    

      And so thinking and feeling, inclining the scales now to the side of life,
      now to the side of death, he slowly returned to life, to find in its
      suffering and joy a refuge from the gloom, emptiness and fear of the
      Infinite.
    

      “No, you did not kill me, Lazarus,” said he firmly. “But
      I will kill you. Go!”
    

      Evening came and divine Augustus partook of food and drink with great joy.
      But there were moments when his raised arm would remain suspended in the
      air, and the light of his shining, eager eyes was dimmed. It seemed as if
      an icy wave of horror washed against his feet. He was vanquished but not
      killed, and coldly awaited his doom, like a black shadow. His nights were
      haunted by horror, but the bright days still brought him the joys, as well
      as the sorrows, of life.
    

      Next day, by order of the Emperor, they burned out Lazarus’ eyes
      with hot irons and sent him home. Even Augustus dared not kill him.
    








      Lazarus returned to the desert and the desert received him with the breath
      of the hissing wind and the ardour of the glowing sun. Again he sat on the
      stone with matted beard uplifted; and two black holes, where the eyes had
      once been, looked dull and horrible at the sky. In the distance the Holy
      City surged and roared restlessly, but near him all was deserted and
      still. No one approached the place where Lazarus, miraculously raised from
      the dead, passed his last days, for his neighbours had long since
      abandoned their homes. His cursed knowledge, driven by the hot irons from
      his eyes deep into the brain, lay there in ambush; as if from ambush it
      might spring out upon men with a thousand unseen eyes. No one dared to
      look at Lazarus.
    

      And in the evening, when the sun, swollen crimson and growing larger, bent
      its way toward the west, blind Lazarus slowly groped after it. He stumbled
      against stones and fell; corpulent and feeble, he rose heavily and walked
      on; and against the red curtain of sunset his dark form and outstretched
      arms gave him the semblance of a cross.
    

      It happened once that he went and never returned. Thus ended the second
      life of Lazarus, who for three days had been in the mysterious thraldom of
      death and then was miraculously raised from the dead.
    











      THE REVOLUTIONIST
    

      BY MICHAÃL P. ARTZYBASHEV
    

      I
    

Gabriel Andersen,
      the teacher, walked to the edge of the school garden, where he paused,
      undecided what to do. Off in the distance, two miles away, the woods hung
      like bluish lace over a field of pure snow. It was a brilliant day. A
      hundred tints glistened on the white ground and the iron bars of the
      garden railing. There was a lightness and transparency in the air that
      only the days of early spring possess. Gabriel Andersen turned his steps
      toward the fringe of blue lace for a tramp in the woods.
    

      “Another spring in my life,” he said, breathing deep and
      peering up at the heavens through his spectacles. Andersen was rather
      given to sentimental poetising. He walked with his hands folded behind
      him, dangling his cane.
    

      He had gone but a few paces when he noticed a group of soldiers and horses
      on the road beyond the garden rail. Their drab uniforms stood out dully
      against the white of the snow, but their swords and horses’ coats
      tossed back the light. Their bowed cavalry legs moved awkwardly on the
      snow. Andersen wondered what they were doing there. Suddenly the nature of
      their business flashed upon him. It was an ugly errand they were upon, an
      instinct rather that his reason told him. Something unusual and terrible
      was to happen. And the same instinct told him he must conceal himself from
      the soldiers. He turned to the left quickly, dropped on his knees, and
      crawled on the soft, thawing, crackling snow to a low haystack, from
      behind which, by craning his neck, he could watch what the soldiers were
      doing.
    

      There were twelve of them, one a stocky young officer in a grey cloak
      caught in prettily at the waist by a silver belt. His face was so red that
      even at that distance Andersen caught the odd, whitish gleam of his light
      protruding moustache and eyebrows against the vivid colour of his skin.
      The broken tones of his raucous voice reached distinctly to where the
      teacher, listening intently, lay hidden.
    

      “I know what I am about. I don’t need anybody’s advice,”
      the officer cried. He clapped his arms akimbo and looked down at some one
      among the group of bustling soldiers. “I’ll show you how to be
      a rebel, you damned skunk.”
    

      Andersen’s heart beat fast. “Good heavens!” he thought.
      “Is it possible?” His head grew chill as if struck by a cold
      wave.
    

      “Officer,” a quiet, restrained, yet distinct voice came from
      among the soldiers, “you have no right—It’s for the
      court to decide—you aren’t a judge—it’s plain
      murder, not—” “Silence!” thundered the officer,
      his voice choking with rage. “I’ll give you a court. Ivanov,
      go ahead.”
    

      He put the spurs to his horse and rode away. Gabriel Andersen mechanically
      observed how carefully the horse picked its way, placing its feet daintily
      as if for the steps of a minuet. Its ears were pricked to catch every
      sound. There was momentary bustle and excitement among the soldiers. Then
      they dispersed in different directions, leaving three persons in black
      behind, two tall men and one very short and frail. Andersen could see the
      hair of the short one’s head. It was very light. And he saw his rosy
      ears sticking out on each side.
    

      Now he fully understood what was to happen. But it was a thing so out of
      the ordinary, so horrible, that he fancied he was dreaming.
    

      “It’s so bright, so beautiful—the snow, the field, the
      woods, the sky. The breath of spring is upon everything. Yet people are
      going to be killed. How can it be? Impossible!” So his thoughts ran
      in confusion. He had the sensation of a man suddenly gone insane, who
      finds he sees, hears and feels what he is not accustomed to, and ought not
      hear, see and feel.
    

      The three men in black stood next to one another hard by the railing, two
      quite close together, the short one some distance away.
    

      “Officer!” one of them cried in a desperate voice—Andersen
      could not see which it was—“God sees us! Officer!”
    

      Eight soldiers dismounted quickly, their spurs and sabres catching
      awkwardly. Evidently they were in a hurry, as if doing a thief’s
      job.
    

      Several seconds passed in silence until the soldiers placed themselves in
      a row a few feet from the black figures and levelled their guns. In doing
      so one soldier knocked his cap from his head. He picked it up and put it
      on again without brushing off the wet snow.
    

      The officer’s mount still kept dancing on one spot with his ears
      pricked, while the other horses, also with sharp ears erect to catch every
      sound, stood motionless looking at the men in black, their long wise heads
      inclined to one side.
    

      “Spare the boy at least!” another voice suddenly pierced the
      air. “Why kill a child, damn you! What has the child done?”
    

      “Ivanov, do what I told you to do,” thundered the officer,
      drowning the other voice. His face turned as scarlet as a piece of red
      flannel.
    

      There followed a scene savage and repulsive in its gruesomeness. The short
      figure in black, with the light hair and the rosy ears, uttered a wild
      shriek in a shrill child’s tones and reeled to one side. Instantly
      it was caught up by two or three soldiers. But the boy began to struggle,
      and two more soldiers ran up.
    

      “Ow-ow-ow-ow!” the boy cried. “Let me go, let me go!
      Ow-ow!”
    

      His shrill voice cut the air like the yell of a stuck porkling not quite
      done to death. Suddenly he grew quiet. Some one must have struck him. An
      unexpected, oppressive silence ensued. The boy was being pushed forward.
      Then there came a deafening report. Andersen started back all in a
      tremble. He saw distinctly, yet vaguely as in a dream, the dropping of two
      dark bodies, the flash of pale sparks, and a light smoke rising in the
      clean, bright atmosphere. He saw the soldiers hastily mounting their
      horses without even glancing at the bodies. He saw them galloping along
      the muddy road, their arms clanking, their horses’ hoofs clattering.
    

      He saw all this, himself now standing in the middle of the road, not
      knowing when and why he had jumped from behind the haystack. He was
      deathly pale. His face was covered with dank sweat, his body was aquiver.
      A physical sadness smote and tortured him. He could not make out the
      nature of the feeling. It was akin to extreme sickness, though far more
      nauseating and terrible.
    

      After the soldiers had disappeared beyond the bend toward the woods,
      people came hurrying to the spot of the shooting, though till then not a
      soul had been in sight.
    

      The bodies lay at the roadside on the other side of the railing, where the
      snow was clean, brittle and untrampled and glistened cheerfully in the
      bright atmosphere. There were three dead bodies, two men and a boy. The
      boy lay with his long soft neck stretched on the snow. The face of the man
      next to the boy was invisible. He had fallen face downward in a pool of
      blood. The third was a big man with a black beard and huge, muscular arms.
      He lay stretched out to the full length of his big body, his arms extended
      over a large area of blood-stained snow.
    

      The three men who had been shot lay black against the white snow,
      motionless. From afar no one could have told the terror that was in their
      immobility as they lay there at the edge of the narrow road crowded with
      people.
    

      That night Gabriel Andersen in his little room in the schoolhouse did not
      write poems as usual. He stood at the window and looked at the distant
      pale disk of the moon in the misty blue sky, and thought. And his thoughts
      were confused, gloomy, and heavy as if a cloud had descended upon his
      brain.
    

      Indistinctly outlined in the dull moonlight he saw the dark railing, the
      trees, the empty garden. It seemed to him that he beheld them—the
      three men who had been shot, two grown up, one a child. They were lying
      there now at the roadside, in the empty, silent field, looking at the
      far-off cold moon with their dead, white eyes as he with his living eyes.
    

      “The time will come some day,” he thought, “when the
      killing of people by others will be an utter impossibility. The time will
      come when even the soldiers and officers who killed these three men will
      realise what they have done and will understand that what they killed them
      for is just as necessary, important, and dear to them—to the
      officers and soldiers—as to those whom they killed.”
    

      “Yes,” he said aloud and solemnly, his eyes moistening,
      “that time will come. They will understand.” And the pale disk
      of the moon was blotted out by the moisture in his eyes.
    

      A large pity pierced his heart for the three victims whose eyes looked at
      the moon, sad and unseeing. A feeling of rage cut him as with a sharp
      knife and took possession of him.
    

      But Gabriel Andersen quieted his heart, whispering softly, “They
      know not what they do.” And this old and ready phrase gave him the
      strength to stifle his rage and indignation.
    

      II
    

The day was as
      bright and white, but the spring was already advanced. The wet soil smelt
      of spring. Clear cold water ran everywhere from under the loose, thawing
      snow. The branches of the trees were springy and elastic. For miles and
      miles around, the country opened up in clear azure stretches.
    

      Yet the clearness and the joy of the spring day were not in the village.
      They were somewhere outside the village, where there were no people—in
      the fields, the woods and the mountains. In the village the air was
      stifling, heavy and terrible as in a nightmare.
    

      Gabriel Andersen stood in the road near a crowd of dark, sad,
      absent-minded people and craned his neck to see the preparations for the
      flogging of seven peasants.
    

      They stood in the thawing snow, and Gabriel Andersen could not persuade
      himself that they were people whom he had long known and understood. By
      that which was about to happen to them, the shameful, terrible,
      ineradicable thing that was to happen to them, they were separated from
      all the rest of the world, and so were unable to feel what he, Gabriel
      Andersen, felt, just as he was unable to feel what they felt. Round them
      were the soldiers, confidently and beautifully mounted on high upon their
      large steeds, who tossed their wise heads and turned their dappled wooden
      faces slowly from side to side, looking contemptuously at him, Gabriel
      Andersen, who was soon to behold this horror, this disgrace, and would do
      nothing, would not dare to do anything. So it seemed to Gabriel Andersen;
      and a sense of cold, intolerable shame gripped him as between two clamps
      of ice through which he could see everything without being able to move,
      cry out or utter a groan.
    

      They took the first peasant. Gabriel Andersen saw his strange, imploring,
      hopeless look. His lips moved, but no sound was heard, and his eyes
      wandered. There was a bright gleam in them as in the eyes of a madman. His
      mind, it was evident, was no longer able to comprehend what was happening.
    

      And so terrible was that face, at once full of reason and of madness, that
      Andersen felt relieved when they put him face downward on the snow and,
      instead of the fiery eyes, he saw his bare back glistening—a
      senseless, shameful, horrible sight.
    

      The large, red-faced soldier in a red cap pushed toward him, looked down
      at his body with seeming delight, and then cried in a clear voice:
    

      “Well, let her go, with God’s blessing!”
    

      Andersen seemed not to see the soldiers, the sky, the horses or the crowd.
      He did not feel the cold, the terror or the shame. He did not hear the
      swish of the knout in the air or the savage howl of pain and despair. He
      only saw the bare back of a man’s body swelling up and covered over
      evenly with white and purple stripes. Gradually the bare back lost the
      semblance of human flesh. The blood oozed and squirted, forming patches,
      drops and rivulets, which ran down on the white, thawing snow.
    

      Terror gripped the soul of Gabriel Andersen as he thought of the moment
      when the man would rise and face all the people who had seen his body
      bared out in the open and reduced to a bloody pulp. He closed his eyes.
      When he opened them, he saw four soldiers in uniform and red hats forcing
      another man down on the snow, his back bared just as shamefully, terribly
      and absurdly—a ludicrously tragic sight.
    

      Then came the third, the fourth, and so on, to the end.
    

      And Gabriel Andersen stood on the wet, thawing snow, craning his neck,
      trembling and stuttering, though he did not say a word. Dank sweat poured
      from his body. A sense of shame permeated his whole being. It was a
      humiliating feeling, having to escape being noticed so that they should
      not catch him and lay him there on the snow and strip him bare—him,
      Gabriel Andersen.
    

      The soldiers pressed and crowded, the horses tossed their heads, the knout
      swished in the air, and the bare, shamed human flesh swelled up, tore, ran
      over with blood, and curled like a snake. Oaths, wild shrieks rained upon
      the village through the clean white air of that spring day.
    

      Andersen now saw five men’s faces at the steps of the town hall, the
      faces of those men who had already undergone their shame. He quickly
      turned his eyes away. After seeing this a man must die, he thought.
    

      III
    

There were
      seventeen of them, fifteen soldiers, a subaltern and a young beardless
      officer. The officer lay in front of the fire looking intently into the
      flames. The soldiers were tinkering with the firearms in the wagon.
    

      Their grey figures moved about quietly on the black thawing ground, and
      occasionally stumbled across the logs sticking out from the blazing fire.
    

      Gabriel Andersen, wearing an overcoat and carrying his cane behind his
      back, approached them. The subaltern, a stout fellow with a moustache,
      jumped up, turned from the fire, and looked at him.
    

      “Who are you? What do you want?” he asked excitedly. From his
      tone it was evident that the soldiers feared everybody in that district,
      through which they went scattering death, destruction and torture.
    

      “Officer,” he said, “there is a man here I don’t
      know.”
    

      The officer looked at Andersen without speaking.
    

      “Officer,” said Andersen in a thin, strained voice, “my
      name is Michelson. I am a business man here, and I am going to the village
      on business. I was afraid I might be mistaken for some one else—you
      know.”
    

      “Then what are you nosing about here for?” the officer said
      angrily, and turned away.
    

      “A business man,” sneered a soldier. “He ought to be
      searched, this business man ought, so as not to be knocking about at
      night. A good one in the jaw is what he needs.”
    

      “He’s a suspicious character, officer,” said the
      subaltern. “Don’t you think we’d better arrest him,
      what?”
    

      “Don’t,” answered the officer lazily. “I’m
      sick of them, damn ‘em.”
    

      Gabriel Andersen stood there without saying anything. His eyes flashed
      strangely in the dark by the firelight. And it was strange to see his
      short, substantial, clean, neat figure in the field at night among the
      soldiers, with his overcoat and cane and glasses glistening in the
      firelight.
    

      The soldiers left him and walked away. Gabriel Andersen remained standing
      for a while. Then he turned and left, rapidly disappearing in the
      darkness.
    

      The night was drawing to a close. The air turned chilly, and the tops of
      the bushes defined themselves more clearly in the dark. Gabriel Andersen
      went again to the military post. But this time he hid, crouching low as he
      made his way under the cover of the bushes. Behind him people moved about
      quietly and carefully, bending the bushes, silent as shadows. Next to
      Gabriel, on his right, walked a tall man with a revolver in his hand.
    

      The figure of a soldier on the hill outlined itself strangely,
      unexpectedly, not where they had been looking for it. It was faintly
      illumined by the gleam from the dying fire. Gabriel Andersen recognised
      the soldier. It was the one who had proposed that he should be searched.
      Nothing stirred in Andersen’s heart. His face was cold and
      motionless, as of a man who is asleep. Round the fire the soldiers lay
      stretched out sleeping, all except the subaltern, who sat with his head
      drooping over his knees.
    

      The tall thin man on Andersen’s right raised the revolver and pulled
      the trigger. A momentary blinding flash, a deafening report.
    

      Andersen saw the guard lift his hands and then sit down on the ground
      clasping his bosom. From all directions short, crackling sparks flashed up
      which combined into one riving roar. The subaltern jumped up and dropped
      straight into the fire. Grey soldiers’ figures moved about in all
      directions like apparitions, throwing up their hands and falling and
      writhing on the black earth. The young officer ran past Andersen,
      fluttering his hands like some strange, frightened bird. Andersen, as if
      he were thinking of something else, raised his cane. With all his strength
      he hit the officer on the head, each blow descending with a dull, ugly
      thud. The officer reeled in a circle, struck a bush, and sat down after
      the second blow, covering his head with both hands, as children do. Some
      one ran up and discharged a revolver as if from Andersen’s own hand.
      The officer sank together in a heap and lunged with great force head
      foremost on the ground. His legs twitched for a while, then he curled up
      quietly.
    

      The shots ceased. Black men with white faces, ghostly grey in the dark,
      moved about the dead bodies of the soldiers, taking away their arms and
      ammunition.
    

      Andersen watched all this with a cold, attentive stare. When all was over,
      he went up, took hold of the burned subaltern’s legs, and tried to
      remove the body from the fire. But it was too heavy for him, and he let it
      go.
    

      IV
    

Andersen sat
      motionless on the steps of the town hall, and thought. He thought of how
      he, Gabriel Andersen, with his spectacles, cane, overcoat and poems, had
      lied and betrayed fifteen men. He thought it was terrible, yet there was
      neither pity, shame nor regret in his heart. Were he to be set free, he
      knew that he, Gabriel Andersen, with the spectacles and poems, would go
      straightway and do it again. He tried to examine himself, to see what was
      going on inside his soul. But his thoughts were heavy and confused. For
      some reason it was more painful for him to think of the three men lying on
      the snow, looking at the pale disk of the far-off moon with their dead,
      unseeing eyes, than of the murdered officer whom he had struck two dry,
      ugly blows on the head. Of his own death he did not think. It seemed to
      him that he had done with everything long, long ago. Something had died,
      had gone out and left him empty, and he must not think about it.
    

      And when they grabbed him by the shoulder and he rose, and they quickly
      led him through the garden where the cabbages raised their dry heads, he
      could not formulate a single thought.
    

      He was conducted to the road and placed at the railing with his back to
      one of the iron bars. He fixed his spectacles, put his hands behind him,
      and stood there with his neat, stocky body, his head slightly inclined to
      one side.
    

      At the last moment he looked in front of him and saw rifle barrels
      pointing at his head, chest and stomach, and pale faces with trembling
      lips. He distinctly saw how one barrel levelled at his forehead suddenly
      dropped.
    

      Something strange and incomprehensible, as if no longer of this world, no
      longer earthly, passed through Andersen’s mind. He straightened
      himself to the full height of his short body and threw back his head in
      simple pride. A strange indistinct sense of cleanness, strength and pride
      filled his soul, and everything—the sun and the sky and the people
      and the field and death—seemed to him insignificant, remote and
      useless.
    

      The bullets hit him in the chest, in the left eye, in the stomach, went
      through his clean coat buttoned all the way up. His glasses shivered into
      bits. He uttered a shriek, circled round, and fell with his face against
      one of the iron bars, his one remaining eye wide open. He clawed the
      ground with his outstretched hands as if trying to support himself.
    

      The officer, who had turned green, rushed toward him, and senselessly
      thrust the revolver against his neck, and fired twice. Andersen stretched
      out on the ground.
    

      The soldiers left quickly. But Andersen remained pressed flat to the
      ground. The index finger of his left hand continued to quiver for about
      ten seconds.
    











      THE OUTRAGE—A TRUE STORY
    

      BY ALEKSANDR I. KUPRIN
    

It was five o’clock
      on a July afternoon. The heat was terrible. The whole of the huge
      stone-built town breathed out heat like a glowing furnace. The glare of
      the white-walled house was insufferable. The asphalt pavements grew soft
      and burned the feet. The shadows of the acacias spread over the cobbled
      road, pitiful and weary. They too seemed hot. The sea, pale in the
      sunlight, lay heavy and immobile as one dead. Over the streets hung a
      white dust.
    

      In the foyer of one of the private theatres a small committee of local
      barristers who had undertaken to conduct the cases of those who had
      suffered in the last pogrom against the Jews was reaching the end of its
      daily task. There were nineteen of them, all juniors, young, progressive
      and conscientious men. The sitting was without formality, and white suits
      of duck, flannel and alpaca were in the majority. They sat anywhere, at
      little marble tables, and the chairman stood in front of an empty counter
      where chocolates were sold in the winter.
    

      The barristers were quite exhausted by the heat which poured in through
      the windows, with the dazzling sunlight and the noise of the streets. The
      proceedings went lazily and with a certain irritation.
    

      A tall young man with a fair moustache and thin hair was in the chair. He
      was dreaming voluptuously how he would be off in an instant on his
      new-bought bicycle to the bungalow. He would undress quickly, and without
      waiting to cool, still bathed in sweat, would fling himself into the
      clear, cold, sweet-smelling sea. His whole body was enervated and tense,
      thrilled by the thought. Impatiently moving the papers before him, he
      spoke in a drowsy voice.
    

      “So, Joseph Moritzovich will conduct the case of Rubinchik...
      Perhaps there is still a statement to be made on the order of the day?”
    

      His youngest colleague, a short, stout Karaite, very black and lively,
      said in a whisper so that every one could hear: “On the order of the
      day, the best thing would be iced kvas...”
    

      The chairman gave him a stern side-glance, but could not restrain a smile.
      He sighed and put both his hands on the table to raise himself and declare
      the meeting closed, when the doorkeeper, who stood at the entrance to the
      theatre, suddenly moved forward and said: “There are seven people
      outside, sir. They want to come in.”
    

      The chairman looked impatiently round the company.
    

      “What is to be done, gentlemen?”
    

      Voices were heard.
    

      “Next time. Basta!”
    

      “Let ‘em put it in writing.”
    

      “If they’ll get it over quickly... Decide it at once.”
    

      “Let ‘em go to the devil. Phew! It’s like boiling pitch.”
    

      “Let them in.” The chairman gave a sign with his head,
      annoyed. “Then bring me a Vichy, please. But it must be cold.”
    

      The porter opened the door and called down the corridor: “Come in.
      They say you may.”
    

      Then seven of the most surprising and unexpected individuals filed into
      the foyer. First appeared a full-grown, confident man in a smart suit, of
      the colour of dry sea-sand, in a magnificent pink shirt with white stripes
      and a crimson rose in his buttonhole. From the front his head looked like
      an upright bean, from the side like a horizontal bean. His face was
      adorned with a strong, bushy, martial moustache. He wore dark blue
      pince-nez on his nose, on his hands straw-coloured gloves. In his left
      hand he held a black walking-stick with a silver mount, in his right a
      light blue handkerchief.
    

      The other six produced a strange, chaotic, incongruous impression, exactly
      as though they had all hastily pooled not merely their clothes, but their
      hands, feet and heads as well. There was a man with the splendid profile
      of a Roman senator, dressed in rags and tatters. Another wore an elegant
      dress waistcoat, from the deep opening of which a dirty Little-Russian
      shirt leapt to the eye. Here were the unbalanced faces of the criminal
      type, but looking with a confidence that nothing could shake. All these
      men, in spite of their apparent youth, evidently possessed a large
      experience of life, an easy manner, a bold approach, and some hidden,
      suspicious cunning.
    

      The gentleman in the sandy suit bowed just his head, neatly and easily,
      and said with a half-question in his voice: “Mr. Chairman?”
    

      “Yes. I am the chairman. What is your business?”
    

      “We—all whom you see before you,” the gentleman began in
      a quiet voice and turned round to indicate his companions, “we come
      as delegates from the United Rostov-Kharkov-and-Odessa-Nikolayev
      Association of Thieves.”
    

      The barristers began to shift in their seats.
    

      The chairman flung himself back and opened his eyes wide. “Association
      of what?” he said, perplexed.
    

      “The Association of Thieves,” the gentleman in the sandy suit
      coolly repeated. “As for myself, my comrades did me the signal
      honour of electing me as the spokesman of the deputation.”
    

      “Very ... pleased,” the chairman said uncertainly.
    

      “Thank you. All seven of us are ordinary thieves—naturally of
      different departments. The Association has authorised us to put before
      your esteemed Committee”—the gentleman again made an elegant
      bow—“our respectful demand for assistance.”
    

      “I don’t quite understand ... quite frankly ... what is the
      connection...” The chairman waved his hands helplessly. “However,
      please go on.”
    

      “The matter about which we have the courage and the honour to apply
      to you, gentlemen, is very clear, very simple, and very brief. It will
      take only six or seven minutes. I consider it my duty to warn you of this
      beforehand, in view of the late hour and the 115 degrees that Fahrenheit
      marks in the shade.” The orator expectorated slightly and glanced at
      his superb gold watch. “You see, in the reports that have lately
      appeared in the local papers of the melancholy and terrible days of the
      last pogrom, there have very often been indications that among the
      instigators of the pogrom who were paid and organised by the police—the
      dregs of society, consisting of drunkards, tramps, souteneurs, and
      hooligans from the slums—thieves were also to be found. At first we
      were silent, but finally we considered ourselves under the necessity of
      protesting against such an unjust and serious accusation, before the face
      of the whole of intellectual society. I know well that in the eye of the
      law we are offenders and enemies of society. But imagine only for a
      moment, gentlemen, the situation of this enemy of society when he is
      accused wholesale of an offence which he not only never committed, but
      which he is ready to resist with the whole strength of his soul. It goes
      without saying that he will feel the outrage of such an injustice more
      keenly than a normal, average, fortunate citizen. Now, we declare that the
      accusation brought against us is utterly devoid of all basis, not merely
      of fact but even of logic. I intend to prove this in a few words if the
      honourable committee will kindly listen.”
    

      “Proceed,” said the chairman.
    

      “Please do ... Please ...” was heard from the barristers, now
      animated.
    

      “I offer you my sincere thanks in the name of all my comrades.
      Believe me, you will never repent your attention to the representatives of
      our ... well, let us say, slippery, but nevertheless difficult,
      profession. ‘So we begin,’ as Giraldoni sings in the prologue
      to Pagliacci.
    

      “But first I would ask your permission, Mr. Chairman, to quench my
      thirst a little... Porter, bring me a lemonade and a glass of English
      bitter, there’s a good fellow. Gentlemen, I will not speak of the
      moral aspect of our profession nor of its social importance. Doubtless you
      know better than I the striking and brilliant paradox of Proudhon: La
      propriete c’est le vol—a paradox if you like, but one that
      has never yet been refuted by the sermons of cowardly bourgeois or fat
      priests. For instance: a father accumulates a million by energetic and
      clever exploitation, and leaves it to his son—a rickety, lazy,
      ignorant, degenerate idiot, a brainless maggot, a true parasite.
      Potentially a million rubles is a million working days, the absolutely
      irrational right to labour, sweat, life, and blood of a terrible number of
      men. Why? What is the ground of reason? Utterly unknown. Then why not
      agree with the proposition, gentlemen, that our profession is to some
      extent as it were a correction of the excessive accumulation of values in
      the hands of individuals, and serves as a protest against all the
      hardships, abominations, arbitrariness, violence, and negligence of the
      human personality, against all the monstrosities created by the bourgeois
      capitalistic organisation of modern society? Sooner or later, this order
      of things will assuredly be overturned by the social revolution. Property
      will pass away into the limbo of melancholy memories and with it, alas! we
      will disappear from the face of the earth, we, les braves chevaliers d’industrie.”
    

      The orator paused to take the tray from the hands of the porter, and
      placed it near to his hand on the table.
    

      “Excuse me, gentlemen... Here, my good man, take this,... and by the
      way, when you go out shut the door close behind you.”
    

      “Very good, your Excellency!” the porter bawled in jest.
    

      The orator drank off half a glass and continued: “However, let us
      leave aside the philosophical, social, and economic aspects of the
      question. I do not wish to fatigue your attention. I must nevertheless
      point out that our profession very closely approaches the idea of that
      which is called art. Into it enter all the elements which go to form art—vocation,
      inspiration, fantasy, inventiveness, ambition, and a long and arduous
      apprenticeship to the science. From it is absent virtue alone, concerning
      which the great Karamzin wrote with such stupendous and fiery fascination.
      Gentlemen, nothing is further from my intention than to trifle with you
      and waste your precious time with idle paradoxes; but I cannot avoid
      expounding my idea briefly. To an outsider’s ear it sounds absurdly
      wild and ridiculous to speak of the vocation of a thief. However, I
      venture to assure you that this vocation is a reality. There are men who
      possess a peculiarly strong visual memory, sharpness and accuracy of eye,
      presence of mind, dexterity of hand, and above all a subtle sense of
      touch, who are as it were born into God’s world for the sole and
      special purpose of becoming distinguished card-sharpers. The pickpockets’
      profession demands extraordinary nimbleness and agility, a terrific
      certainty of movement, not to mention a ready wit, a talent for
      observation and strained attention. Some have a positive vocation for
      breaking open safes: from their tenderest childhood they are attracted by
      the mysteries of every kind of complicated mechanism—bicycles,
      sewing machines, clock-work toys and watches. Finally, gentlemen, there
      are people with an hereditary animus against private property. You may
      call this phenomenon degeneracy. But I tell you that you cannot entice a
      true thief, and thief by vocation, into the prose of honest vegetation by
      any gingerbread reward, or by the offer of a secure position, or by the
      gift of money, or by a woman’s love: because there is here a
      permanent beauty of risk, a fascinating abyss of danger, the delightful
      sinking of the heart, the impetuous pulsation of life, the ecstasy! You
      are armed with the protection of the law, by locks, revolvers, telephones,
      police and soldiery; but we only by our own dexterity, cunning and
      fearlessness. We are the foxes, and society—is a chicken-run guarded
      by dogs. Are you aware that the most artistic and gifted natures in our
      villages become horse-thieves and poachers? What would you have? Life is
      so meagre, so insipid, so intolerably dull to eager and high-spirited
      souls!
    

      “I pass on to inspiration. Gentlemen, doubtless you have had to read
      of thefts that were supernatural in design and execution. In the headlines
      of the newspapers they are called ‘An Amazing Robbery,’ or 'An
      Ingenious Swindle,’ or again ‘A Clever Ruse of the Gangsters.’
      In such cases our bourgeois paterfamilias waves his hands and exclaims:
      'What a terrible thing! If only their abilities were turned to good—their
      inventiveness, their amazing knowledge of human psychology, their
      self-possession, their fearlessness, their incomparable histrionic powers!
      What extraordinary benefits they would bring to the country!’ But it
      is well known that the bourgeois paterfamilias was specially devised by
      Heaven to utter commonplaces and trivialities. I myself sometimes—we
      thieves are sentimental people, I confess—I myself sometimes admire
      a beautiful sunset in Aleksandra Park or by the sea-shore. And I am always
      certain beforehand that some one near me will say with infallible aplomb:
      'Look at it. If it were put into picture no one would ever believe it!’
      I turn round and naturally I see a self-satisfied, full-fed paterfamilias,
      who delights in repeating some one else’s silly statement as though
      it were his own. As for our dear country, the bourgeois paterfamilias
      looks upon it as though it were a roast turkey. If you’ve managed to
      cut the best part of the bird for yourself, eat it quietly in a
      comfortable corner and praise God. But he’s not really the important
      person. I was led away by my detestation of vulgarity and I apologise for
      the digression. The real point is that genius and inspiration, even when
      they are not devoted to the service of the Orthodox Church, remain rare
      and beautiful things. Progress is a law—and theft too has its
      creation.
    

      “Finally, our profession is by no means as easy and pleasant as it
      seems to the first glance. It demands long experience, constant practice,
      slow and painful apprenticeship. It comprises in itself hundreds of
      supple, skilful processes that the cleverest juggler cannot compass. That
      I may not give you only empty words, gentlemen, I will perform a few
      experiments before you now. I ask you to have every confidence in the
      demonstrators. We are all at present in the enjoyment of legal freedom,
      and though we are usually watched, and every one of us is known by face,
      and our photographs adorn the albums of all detective departments, for the
      time being we are not under the necessity of hiding ourselves from
      anybody. If any one of you should recognise any of us in the future under
      different circumstances, we ask you earnestly always to act in accordance
      with your professional duties and your obligations as citizens. In
      grateful return for your kind attention we have decided to declare your
      property inviolable, and to invest it with a thieves’ taboo.
      However, I proceed to business.”
    

      The orator turned round and gave an order: “Sesoi the Great, will
      you come this way!”
    

      An enormous fellow with a stoop, whose hands reached to his knees, without
      a forehead or a neck, like a big, fair Hercules, came forward. He grinned
      stupidly and rubbed his left eyebrow in his confusion.
    

      “Can’t do nothin’ here,” he said hoarsely.
    

      The gentleman in the sandy suit spoke for him, turning to the committee.
    

      “Gentlemen, before you stands a respected member of our association.
      His specialty is breaking open safes, iron strong boxes, and other
      receptacles for monetary tokens. In his night work he sometimes avails
      himself of the electric current of the lighting installation for fusing
      metals. Unfortunately he has nothing on which he can demonstrate the best
      items of his repertoire. He will open the most elaborate lock
      irreproachably... By the way, this door here, it’s locked, is it
      not?”
    

      Every one turned to look at the door, on which a printed notice hung:
      “Stage Door. Strictly Private.”
    

      “Yes, the door’s locked, evidently,” the chairman
      agreed.
    

      “Admirable. Sesoi the Great, will you be so kind?”
    

      “‘Tain’t nothin’ at all,” said the giant
      leisurely.
    

      He went close to the door, shook it cautiously with his hand, took out of
      his pocket a small bright instrument, bent down to the keyhole, made some
      almost imperceptible movements with the tool, suddenly straightened and
      flung the door wide in silence. The chairman had his watch in his hands.
      The whole affair took only ten seconds.
    

      “Thank you, Sesoi the Great,” said the gentleman in the sandy
      suit politely. “You may go back to your seat.”
    

      But the chairman interrupted in some alarm: “Excuse me. This is all
      very interesting and instructive, but ... is it included in your esteemed
      colleague’s profession to be able to lock the door again?”
    

      “Ah, mille pardons.” The gentleman bowed hurriedly.
      “It slipped my mind. Sesoi the Great, would you oblige?”
    

      The door was locked with the same adroitness and the same silence. The
      esteemed colleague waddled back to his friends, grinning.
    

      “Now I will have the honour to show you the skill of one of our
      comrades who is in the line of picking pockets in theatres and
      railway-stations,” continued the orator. “He is still very
      young, but you may to some extent judge from the delicacy of his present
      work of the heights he will attain by diligence. Yasha!” A swarthy
      youth in a blue silk blouse and long glacÃ© boots, like a gipsy, came
      forward with a swagger, fingering the tassels of his belt, and merrily
      screwing up his big, impudent black eyes with yellow whites.
    

      “Gentlemen,” said the gentleman in the sandy suit
      persuasively, “I must ask if one of you would be kind enough to
      submit himself to a little experiment. I assure you this will be an
      exhibition only, just a game.”
    

      He looked round over the seated company.
    

      The short plump Karaite, black as a beetle, came forward from his table.
    

      “At your service,” he said amusedly.
    

      “Yasha!” The orator signed with his head.
    

      Yasha came close to the solicitor. On his left arm, which was bent, hung a
      bright-coloured, figured scarf.
    

      “Suppose yer in church or at the bar in one of the halls,—or
      watchin’ a circus,” he began in a sugary, fluent voice.
      “I see straight off—there’s a toff... Excuse me, sir.
      Suppose you’re the toff. There’s no offence—just means a
      rich gent, decent enough, but don’t know his way about. First—what’s
      he likely to have about ‘im? All sorts. Mostly, a ticker and a
      chain. Whereabouts does he keep ‘em? Somewhere in his top vest
      pocket—here. Others have ‘em in the bottom pocket. Just here.
      Purse—most always in the trousers, except when a greeny keeps it in
      his jacket. Cigar-case. Have a look first what it is—gold, silver—with
      a monogram. Leather—what decent man’d soil his hands?
      Cigar-case. Seven pockets: here, here, here, up there, there, here and
      here again. That’s right, ain’t it? That’s how you go to
      work.”
    

      As he spoke the young man smiled. His eyes shone straight into the
      barrister’s. With a quick, dexterous movement of his right hand he
      pointed to various portions of his clothes.
    

      “Then again you might see a pin here in the tie. However we do not
      appropriate. Such gents nowadays—they hardly ever wear a real
      stone. Then I comes up to him. I begin straight off to talk to him like a
      gent: ‘Sir, would you be so kind as to give me a light from your
      cigarette’—or something of the sort. At any rate, I enter into
      conversation. What’s next? I look him straight in the peepers, just
      like this. Only two of me fingers are at it—just this and this.”
      Yasha lifted two fingers of his right hand on a level with the solicitor’s
      face, the forefinger and the middle finger and moved them about.
    

      “D’ you see? With these two fingers I run over the whole
      pianner. Nothin’ wonderful in it: one, two, three—ready. Any
      man who wasn’t stupid could learn easily. That’s all it is.
      Most ordinary business. I thank you.”
    

      The pickpocket swung on his heel as if to return to his seat.
    

      “Yasha!” The gentleman in the sandy suit said with meaning
      weight. “Yasha!” he repeated sternly.
    

      Yasha stopped. His back was turned to the barrister, but be evidently gave
      his representative an imploring look, because the latter frowned and shook
      his head.
    

      “Yasha!” he said for the third time, in a threatening tone.
    

      “Huh!” The young thief grunted in vexation and turned to face
      the solicitor. “Where’s your little watch, sir?” he said
      in a piping voice.
    

      “Oh!” the Karaite brought himself up sharp.
    

      “You see—now you say ‘Oh!’” Yasha continued
      reproachfully. “All the while you were admiring me right hand, I was
      operatin’ yer watch with my left. Just with these two little
      fingers, under the scarf. That’s why we carry a scarf. Since your
      chain’s not worth anything—a present from some mamselle
      and the watch is a gold one, I’ve left you the chain as a keepsake.
      Take it,” he added with a sigh, holding out the watch.
    

      “But ... That is clever,” the barrister said in confusion.
      “I didn’t notice it at all.”
    

      “That’s our business,” Yasha said with pride.
    

      He swaggered back to his comrades. Meantime the orator took a drink from
      his glass and continued.
    

      “Now, gentlemen, our next collaborator will give you an exhibition
      of some ordinary card tricks, which are worked at fairs, on steamboats and
      railways. With three cards, for instance, an ace, a queen, and a six, he
      can quite easily... But perhaps you are tired of these demonstrations,
      gentlemen.”...
    

      “Not at all. It’s extremely interesting,” the chairman
      answered affably. “I should like to ask one question—that is
      if it is not too indiscreet—what is your own specialty?”
    

      “Mine... H’m... No, how could it be an indiscretion?... I work
      the big diamond shops ... and my other business is banks,” answered
      the orator with a modest smile. “Don’t think this occupation
      is easier than others. Enough that I know four European languages, German,
      French, English, and Italian, not to mention Polish, Ukrainian and
      Yiddish. But shall I show you some more experiments, Mr. Chairman?”
    

      The chairman looked at his watch.
    

      “Unfortunately the time is too short,” he said. “Wouldn’t
      it be better to pass on to the substance of your business? Besides, the
      experiments we have just seen have amply convinced us of the talent of
      your esteemed associates... Am I not right, Isaac Abramovich?”
    

      “Yes, yes ... absolutely,” the Karaite barrister readily
      confirmed.
    

      “Admirable,” the gentleman in the sandy suit kindly agreed.
      “My dear Count”—he turned to a blond, curly-haired man,
      with a face like a billiard-maker on a bank-holiday—“put your
      instruments away. They will not be wanted. I have only a few words more to
      say, gentlemen. Now that you have convinced yourselves that our art,
      although it does not enjoy the patronage of high-placed individuals, is
      nevertheless an art; and you have probably come to my opinion that this
      art is one which demands many personal qualities besides constant labour,
      danger, and unpleasant misunderstandings—you will also, I hope,
      believe that it is possible to become attached to its practice and to love
      and esteem it, however strange that may appear at first sight. Picture to
      yourselves that a famous poet of talent, whose tales and poems adorn the
      pages of our best magazines, is suddenly offered the chance of writing
      verses at a penny a line, signed into the bargain, as an advertisement for
      ‘Cigarettes Jasmine’—or that a slander was spread about
      one of you distinguished barristers, accusing you of making a business of
      concocting evidence for divorce cases, or of writing petitions from the
      cabmen to the governor in public-houses! Certainly your relatives, friends
      and acquaintances wouldn’t believe it. But the rumour has already
      done its poisonous work, and you have to live through minutes of torture.
      Now picture to yourselves that such a disgraceful and vexatious slander,
      started by God knows whom, begins to threaten not only your good name and
      your quiet digestion, but your freedom, your health, and even your life!
    

      “This is the position of us thieves, now being slandered by the
      newspapers. I must explain. There is in existence a class of scum—passez-moi
      le mot—whom we call their ‘Mothers’ Darlings.’
      With these we are unfortunately confused. They have neither shame nor
      conscience, a dissipated riff-raff, mothers’ useless darlings, idle,
      clumsy drones, shop assistants who commit unskilful thefts. He thinks
      nothing of living on his mistress, a prostitute, like the male mackerel,
      who always swims after the female and lives on her excrements. He is
      capable of robbing a child with violence in a dark alley, in order to get
      a penny; he will kill a man in his sleep and torture an old woman. These
      men are the pests of our profession. For them the beauties and the
      traditions of the art have no existence. They watch us real, talented
      thieves like a pack of jackals after a lion. Suppose I’ve managed to
      bring off an important job—we won’t mention the fact that I
      have to leave two-thirds of what I get to the receivers who sell the goods
      and discount the notes, or the customary subsidies to our incorruptible
      police—I still have to share out something to each one of these
      parasites, who have got wind of my job, by accident, hearsay, or a casual
      glance.
    

      “So we call them Motients, which means ‘half,’ a
      corruption of moitiÃ© ... Original etymology. I pay him only because
      he knows and may inform against me. And it mostly happens that even when
      he’s got his share he runs off to the police in order to get another
      dollar. We, honest thieves... Yes, you may laugh, gentlemen, but I repeat
      it: we honest thieves detest these reptiles. We have another name for
      them, a stigma of ignominy; but I dare not utter it here out of respect
      for the place and for my audience. Oh, yes, they would gladly accept an
      invitation to a pogrom. The thought that we may be confused with them is a
      hundred times more insulting to us even than the accusation of taking part
      in a pogrom.
    

      “Gentlemen! While I have been speaking I have often noticed smiles
      on your faces. I understand you. Our presence here, our application for
      your assistance, and above all the unexpectedness of such a phenomenon as
      a systematic organisation of thieves, with delegates who are thieves, and
      a leader of the deputation, also a thief by profession—it is all so
      original that it must inevitably arouse a smile. But now I will speak from
      the depth of my heart. Let us be rid of our outward wrappings, gentlemen,
      let us speak as men to men.
    

      “Almost all of us are educated, and all love books. We don’t
      only read the adventures of Roqueambole, as the realistic writers say of
      us. Do you think our hearts did not bleed and our cheeks did not burn from
      shame, as though we had been slapped in the face, all the time that this
      unfortunate, disgraceful, accursed, cowardly war lasted. Do you really
      think that our souls do not flame with anger when our country is lashed
      with Cossack-whips, and trodden under foot, shot and spit at by mad,
      exasperated men? Will you not believe that we thieves meet every step
      towards the liberation to come with a thrill of ecstasy?
    

      “We understand, every one of us—perhaps only a little less
      than you barristers, gentlemen—the real sense of the pogroms. Every
      time that some dastardly event or some ignominious failure has occurred,
      after executing a martyr in a dark corner of a fortress, or after
      deceiving public confidence, some one who is hidden and unapproachable
      gets frightened of the people’s anger and diverts its vicious
      element upon the heads of innocent Jews. Whose diabolical mind invents
      these pogroms—these titanic blood-lettings, these cannibal
      amusements for the dark, bestial souls?
    

      “We all see with certain clearness that the last convulsions of the
      bureaucracy are at hand. Forgive me if I present it imaginatively. There
      was a people that had a chief temple, wherein dwelt a bloodthirsty deity,
      behind a curtain, guarded by priests. Once fearless hands tore the curtain
      away. Then all the people saw, instead of a god, a huge, shaggy, voracious
      spider, like a loathsome cuttlefish. They beat it and shoot at it: it is
      dismembered already; but still in the frenzy of its final agony it
      stretches over all the ancient temple its disgusting, clawing tentacles.
      And the priests, themselves under sentence of death, push into the monster’s
      grasp all whom they can seize in their terrified, trembling fingers.
    

      “Forgive me. What I have said is probably wild and incoherent. But I
      am somewhat agitated. Forgive me. I continue. We thieves by profession
      know better than any one else how these pogroms were organised. We wander
      everywhere: into public houses, markets, tea-shops, doss-houses, public
      places, the harbour. We can swear before God and man and posterity that we
      have seen how the police organise the massacres, without shame and almost
      without concealment. We know them all by face, in uniform or disguise.
      They invited many of us to take part; but there was none so vile among us
      as to give even the outward consent that fear might have extorted.
    

      “You know, of course, how the various strata of Russian society
      behave towards the police? It is not even respected by those who avail
      themselves of its dark services. But we despise and hate it three, ten
      times more—not because many of us have been tortured in the
      detective departments, which are just chambers of horror, beaten almost to
      death, beaten with whips of ox-hide and of rubber in order to extort a
      confession or to make us betray a comrade. Yes, we hate them for that too.
      But we thieves, all of us who have been in prison, have a mad passion for
      freedom. Therefore we despise our gaolers with all the hatred that a human
      heart can feel. I will speak for myself. I have been tortured three times
      by police detectives till I was half dead. My lungs and liver have been
      shattered. In the mornings I spit blood until I can breathe no more. But
      if I were told that I will be spared a fourth flogging only by shaking
      hands with a chief of the detective police, I would refuse to do it!
    

      “And then the newspapers say that we took from these hands
      Judas-money, dripping with human blood. No, gentlemen, it is a slander
      which stabs our very soul, and inflicts insufferable pain. Not money, nor
      threats, nor promises will suffice to make us mercenary murderers of our
      brethren, nor accomplices with them.”
    

      “Never ... No ... No ... ,” his comrades standing behind him
      began to murmur.
    

      “I will say more,” the thief continued. “Many of us
      protected the victims during this pogrom. Our friend, called Sesoi the
      Great—you have just seen him, gentlemen—was then lodging with
      a Jewish braid-maker on the Moldavanka. With a poker in his hands he
      defended his landlord from a great horde of assassins. It is true, Sesoi
      the Great is a man of enormous physical strength, and this is well known
      to many of the inhabitants of the Moldavanka. But you must agree,
      gentlemen, that in these moments Sesoi the Great looked straight into the
      face of death. Our comrade Martin the Miner—this gentleman here”
      —the orator pointed to a pale, bearded man with beautiful eyes who
      was holding himself in the background—“saved an old Jewess,
      whom he had never seen before, who was being pursued by a crowd of these
      canaille. They broke his head with a crowbar for his pains, smashed
      his arm in two places and splintered a rib. He is only just out of
      hospital. That is the way our most ardent and determined members acted.
      The others trembled for anger and wept for their own impotence.
    

      “None of us will forget the horrors of those bloody days and bloody
      nights lit up by the glare of fires, those sobbing women, those little
      children’s bodies torn to pieces and left lying in the street. But
      for all that not one of us thinks that the police and the mob are the real
      origin of the evil. These tiny, stupid, loathsome vermin are only a
      senseless fist that is governed by a vile, calculating mind, moved by a
      diabolical will.
    

      “Yes, gentlemen,” the orator continued, “we thieves have
      nevertheless merited your legal contempt. But when you, noble gentlemen,
      need the help of clever, brave, obedient men at the barricades, men who
      will be ready to meet death with a song and a jest on their lips for the
      most glorious word in the world—Freedom—will you cast us off
      then and order us away because of an inveterate revulsion? Damn it all,
      the first victim in the French Revolution was a prostitute. She jumped up
      on to a barricade, with her skirt caught elegantly up into her hand and
      called out: ‘Which of you soldiers will dare to shoot a woman?’
      Yes, by God.” The orator exclaimed aloud and brought down his fist
      on to the marble table top: “They killed her, but her action was
      magnificent, and the beauty of her words immortal.
    

      “If you should drive us away on the great day, we will turn to you
      and say: ‘You spotless Cherubim—if human thoughts had the
      power to wound, kill, and rob man of honour and property, then which of
      you innocent doves would not deserve the knout and imprisonment for life?’
      Then we will go away from you and build our own gay, sporting, desperate
      thieves’ barricade, and will die with such united songs on our lips
      that you will envy us, you who are whiter than snow!
    

      “But I have been once more carried away. Forgive me. I am at the
      end. You now see, gentlemen, what feelings the newspaper slanders have
      excited in us. Believe in our sincerity and do what you can to remove the
      filthy stain which has so unjustly been cast upon us. I have finished.”
    

      He went away from the table and joined his comrades. The barristers were
      whispering in an undertone, very much as the magistrates of the bench at
      sessions. Then the chairman rose.
    

      “We trust you absolutely, and we will make every effort to clear
      your association of this most grievous charge. At the same time my
      colleagues have authorised me, gentlemen, to convey to you their deep
      respect for your passionate feelings as citizens. And for my own part I
      ask the leader of the deputation for permission to shake him by the hand.”
    

      The two men, both tall and serious, held each other’s hands in a
      strong, masculine grip.
    

      The barristers were leaving the theatre; but four of them hung back a
      little beside the clothes rack in the hall. Isaac Abramovich could not
      find his new, smart grey hat anywhere. In its place on the wooden peg hung
      a cloth cap jauntily flattened in on either side.
    

      “Yasha!” The stern voice of the orator was suddenly heard from
      the other side of the door. “Yasha! It’s the last time I’ll
      speak to you, curse you! ... Do you hear?” The heavy door opened
      wide. The gentleman in the sandy suit entered. In his hands he held Isaac
      Abramovich’s hat; on his face was a well-bred smile.
    

      “Gentlemen, for Heaven’s sake forgive us—an odd little
      misunderstanding. One of our comrades exchanged his hat by accident... Oh,
      it is yours! A thousand pardons. Doorkeeper! Why don’t you keep an
      eye on things, my good fellow, eh? Just give me that cap, there. Once
      more, I ask you to forgive me, gentlemen.”
    

      With a pleasant bow and the same well-bred smile he made his way quickly
      into the street.
    





      The Duel and Other Stories
    








      THE DUEL
    

      I
    

It was eight o’clock
      in the morning—the time when the officers, the local officials, and
      the visitors usually took their morning dip in the sea after the hot,
      stifling night, and then went into the pavilion to drink tea or coffee.
      Ivan Andreitch Laevsky, a thin, fair young man of twenty-eight, wearing
      the cap of a clerk in the Ministry of Finance and with slippers on his
      feet, coming down to bathe, found a number of acquaintances on the beach,
      and among them his friend Samoylenko, the army doctor.
    

      With his big cropped head, short neck, his red face, his big nose, his
      shaggy black eyebrows and grey whiskers, his stout puffy figure and his
      hoarse military bass, this Samoylenko made on every newcomer the
      unpleasant impression of a gruff bully; but two or three days after making
      his acquaintance, one began to think his face extraordinarily
      good-natured, kind, and even handsome. In spite of his clumsiness and
      rough manner, he was a peaceable man, of infinite kindliness and goodness
      of heart, always ready to be of use. He was on familiar terms with every
      one in the town, lent every one money, doctored every one, made matches,
      patched up quarrels, arranged picnics at which he cooked shashlik
      and an awfully good soup of grey mullets. He was always looking after
      other people’s affairs and trying to interest some one on their
      behalf, and was always delighted about something. The general opinion
      about him was that he was without faults of character. He had only two
      weaknesses: he was ashamed of his own good nature, and tried to disguise
      it by a surly expression and an assumed gruffness; and he liked his
      assistants and his soldiers to call him “Your Excellency,”
      although he was only a civil councillor.
    

      “Answer one question for me, Alexandr Daviditch,” Laevsky
      began, when both he and Samoylenko were in the water up to their
      shoulders. “Suppose you had loved a woman and had been living with
      her for two or three years, and then left off caring for her, as one does,
      and began to feel that you had nothing in common with her. How would you
      behave in that case?”
    

      “It’s very simple. ‘You go where you please, madam’—and
      that would be the end of it.”
    

      “It’s easy to say that! But if she has nowhere to go? A woman
      with no friends or relations, without a farthing, who can’t work . .
      .”
    

      “Well? Five hundred roubles down or an allowance of twenty-five
      roubles a month—and nothing more. It’s very simple.”
    

      “Even supposing you have five hundred roubles and can pay
      twenty-five roubles a month, the woman I am speaking of is an educated
      woman and proud. Could you really bring yourself to offer her money? And
      how would you do it?”
    

      Samoylenko was going to answer, but at that moment a big wave covered them
      both, then broke on the beach and rolled back noisily over the shingle.
      The friends got out and began dressing.
    

      “Of course, it is difficult to live with a woman if you don’t
      love her,” said Samoylenko, shaking the sand out of his boots.
      “But one must look at the thing humanely, Vanya. If it were my case,
      I should never show a sign that I did not love her, and I should go on
      living with her till I died.”
    

      He was at once ashamed of his own words; he pulled himself up and said:
    

      “But for aught I care, there might be no females at all. Let them
      all go to the devil!”
    

      The friends dressed and went into the pavilion. There Samoylenko was quite
      at home, and even had a special cup and saucer. Every morning they brought
      him on a tray a cup of coffee, a tall cut glass of iced water, and a tiny
      glass of brandy. He would first drink the brandy, then the hot coffee,
      then the iced water, and this must have been very nice, for after drinking
      it his eyes looked moist with pleasure, he would stroke his whiskers with
      both hands, and say, looking at the sea:
    

      “A wonderfully magnificent view!”
    

      After a long night spent in cheerless, unprofitable thoughts which
      prevented him from sleeping, and seemed to intensify the darkness and
      sultriness of the night, Laevsky felt listless and shattered. He felt no
      better for the bathe and the coffee.
    

      “Let us go on with our talk, Alexandr Daviditch,” he said.
      “I won’t make a secret of it; I’ll speak to you openly
      as to a friend. Things are in a bad way with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and me .
      . . a very bad way! Forgive me for forcing my private affairs upon you,
      but I must speak out.”
    

      Samoylenko, who had a misgiving of what he was going to speak about,
      dropped his eyes and drummed with his fingers on the table.
    

      “I’ve lived with her for two years and have ceased to love
      her,” Laevsky went on; “or, rather, I realised that I never
      had felt any love for her. . . . These two years have been a mistake.”
    

      It was Laevsky’s habit as he talked to gaze attentively at the pink
      palms of his hands, to bite his nails, or to pinch his cuffs. And he did
      so now.
    

      “I know very well you can’t help me,” he said. “But
      I tell you, because unsuccessful and superfluous people like me find their
      salvation in talking. I have to generalise about everything I do. I’m
      bound to look for an explanation and justification of my absurd existence
      in somebody else’s theories, in literary types—in the idea
      that we, upper-class Russians, are degenerating, for instance, and so on.
      Last night, for example, I comforted myself by thinking all the time:
      ‘Ah, how true Tolstoy is, how mercilessly true!’ And that did
      me good. Yes, really, brother, he is a great writer, say what you like!”
    

      Samoylenko, who had never read Tolstoy and was intending to do so every
      day of his life, was a little embarrassed, and said:
    

      “Yes, all other authors write from imagination, but he writes
      straight from nature.”
    

      “My God!” sighed Laevsky; “how distorted we all are by
      civilisation! I fell in love with a married woman and she with me. . . .
      To begin with, we had kisses, and calm evenings, and vows, and Spencer,
      and ideals, and interests in common. . . . What a deception! We really ran
      away from her husband, but we lied to ourselves and made out that we ran
      away from the emptiness of the life of the educated class. We pictured our
      future like this: to begin with, in the Caucasus, while we were getting to
      know the people and the place, I would put on the Government uniform and
      enter the service; then at our leisure we would pick out a plot of ground,
      would toil in the sweat of our brow, would have a vineyard and a field,
      and so on. If you were in my place, or that zoologist of yours, Von Koren,
      you might live with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna for thirty years, perhaps, and
      might leave your heirs a rich vineyard and three thousand acres of maize;
      but I felt like a bankrupt from the first day. In the town you have
      insufferable heat, boredom, and no society; if you go out into the
      country, you fancy poisonous spiders, scorpions, or snakes lurking under
      every stone and behind every bush, and beyond the fields—mountains
      and the desert. Alien people, an alien country, a wretched form of
      civilisation—all that is not so easy, brother, as walking on the
      Nevsky Prospect in one’s fur coat, arm-in-arm with Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, dreaming of the sunny South. What is needed here is a life and
      death struggle, and I’m not a fighting man. A wretched neurasthenic,
      an idle gentleman . . . . From the first day I knew that my dreams of a
      life of labour and of a vineyard were worthless. As for love, I ought to
      tell you that living with a woman who has read Spencer and has followed
      you to the ends of the earth is no more interesting than living with any
      Anfissa or Akulina. There’s the same smell of ironing, of powder,
      and of medicines, the same curl-papers every morning, the same
      self-deception.”
    

      “You can’t get on in the house without an iron,” said
      Samoylenko, blushing at Laevsky’s speaking to him so openly of a
      lady he knew. “You are out of humour to-day, Vanya, I notice.
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna is a splendid woman, highly educated, and you are a
      man of the highest intellect. Of course, you are not married,”
      Samoylenko went on, glancing round at the adjacent tables, “but that’s
      not your fault; and besides . . . one ought to be above conventional
      prejudices and rise to the level of modern ideas. I believe in free love
      myself, yes. . . . But to my thinking, once you have settled together, you
      ought to go on living together all your life.”
    

      “Without love?”
    

      “I will tell you directly,” said Samoylenko. “Eight
      years ago there was an old fellow, an agent, here—a man of very
      great intelligence. Well, he used to say that the great thing in married
      life was patience. Do you hear, Vanya? Not love, but patience. Love cannot
      last long. You have lived two years in love, and now evidently your
      married life has reached the period when, in order to preserve
      equilibrium, so to speak, you ought to exercise all your patience. . . .”
    

      “You believe in your old agent; to me his words are meaningless.
      Your old man could be a hypocrite; he could exercise himself in the virtue
      of patience, and, as he did so, look upon a person he did not love as an
      object indispensable for his moral exercises; but I have not yet fallen so
      low. If I want to exercise myself in patience, I will buy dumb-bells or a
      frisky horse, but I’ll leave human beings alone.”
    

      Samoylenko asked for some white wine with ice. When they had drunk a glass
      each, Laevsky suddenly asked:
    

      “Tell me, please, what is the meaning of softening of the brain?”
    

      “How can I explain it to you? . . . It’s a disease in which
      the brain becomes softer . . . as it were, dissolves.”
    

      “Is it curable?”
    

      “Yes, if the disease is not neglected. Cold douches, blisters. . . .
      Something internal, too.”
    

      “Oh! . . . Well, you see my position; I can’t live with her:
      it is more than I can do. While I’m with you I can be philosophical
      about it and smile, but at home I lose heart completely; I am so utterly
      miserable, that if I were told, for instance, that I should have to live
      another month with her, I should blow out my brains. At the same time,
      parting with her is out of the question. She has no friends or relations;
      she cannot work, and neither she nor I have any money. . . . What could
      become of her? To whom could she go? There is nothing one can think of. .
      . . Come, tell me, what am I to do?”
    

      “H’m! . . .” growled Samoylenko, not knowing what to
      answer. “Does she love you?”
    

      “Yes, she loves me in so far as at her age and with her temperament
      she wants a man. It would be as difficult for her to do without me as to
      do without her powder or her curl-papers. I am for her an indispensable,
      integral part of her boudoir.”
    

      Samoylenko was embarrassed.
    

      “You are out of humour to-day, Vanya,” he said. “You
      must have had a bad night.”
    

      “Yes, I slept badly. . . . Altogether, I feel horribly out of sorts,
      brother. My head feels empty; there’s a sinking at my heart, a
      weakness. . . . I must run away.”
    

      “Run where?”
    

      “There, to the North. To the pines and the mushrooms, to people and
      ideas. . . . I’d give half my life to bathe now in some little
      stream in the province of Moscow or Tula; to feel chilly, you know, and
      then to stroll for three hours even with the feeblest student, and to talk
      and talk endlessly. . . . And the scent of the hay! Do you remember it?
      And in the evening, when one walks in the garden, sounds of the piano
      float from the house; one hears the train passing. . . .”
    

      Laevsky laughed with pleasure; tears came into his eyes, and to cover
      them, without getting up, he stretched across the next table for the
      matches.
    

      “I have not been in Russia for eighteen years,” said
      Samoylenko. “I’ve forgotten what it is like. To my mind, there
      is not a country more splendid than the Caucasus.”
    

      “Vereshtchagin has a picture in which some men condemned to death
      are languishing at the bottom of a very deep well. Your magnificent
      Caucasus strikes me as just like that well. If I were offered the choice
      of a chimney-sweep in Petersburg or a prince in the Caucasus, I should
      choose the job of chimney-sweep.”
    

      Laevsky grew pensive. Looking at his stooping figure, at his eyes fixed
      dreamily at one spot, at his pale, perspiring face and sunken temples, at
      his bitten nails, at the slipper which had dropped off his heel,
      displaying a badly darned sock, Samoylenko was moved to pity, and probably
      because Laevsky reminded him of a helpless child, he asked:
    

      “Is your mother living?”
    

      “Yes, but we are on bad terms. She could not forgive me for this
      affair.”
    

      Samoylenko was fond of his friend. He looked upon Laevsky as a
      good-natured fellow, a student, a man with no nonsense about him, with
      whom one could drink, and laugh, and talk without reserve. What he
      understood in him he disliked extremely. Laevsky drank a great deal and at
      unsuitable times; he played cards, despised his work, lived beyond his
      means, frequently made use of unseemly expressions in conversation, walked
      about the streets in his slippers, and quarrelled with Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna before other people—and Samoylenko did not like this. But
      the fact that Laevsky had once been a student in the Faculty of Arts,
      subscribed to two fat reviews, often talked so cleverly that only a few
      people understood him, was living with a well-educated woman—all
      this Samoylenko did not understand, and he liked this and respected
      Laevsky, thinking him superior to himself.
    

      “There is another point,” said Laevsky, shaking his head.
      “Only it is between ourselves. I’m concealing it from
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna for the time. . . . Don’t let it out before
      her. . . . I got a letter the day before yesterday, telling me that her
      husband has died from softening of the brain.”
    

      “The Kingdom of Heaven be his!” sighed Samoylenko. “Why
      are you concealing it from her?”
    

      “To show her that letter would be equivalent to ‘Come to
      church to be married.’ And we should first have to make our
      relations clear. When she understands that we can’t go on living
      together, I will show her the letter. Then there will be no danger in it.”
    

      “Do you know what, Vanya,” said Samoylenko, and a sad and
      imploring expression came into his face, as though he were going to ask
      him about something very touching and were afraid of being refused.
      “Marry her, my dear boy!”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Do your duty to that splendid woman! Her husband is dead, and so
      Providence itself shows you what to do!”
    

      “But do understand, you queer fellow, that it is impossible. To
      marry without love is as base and unworthy of a man as to perform mass
      without believing in it.”
    

      “But it’s your duty to.”
    

      “Why is it my duty?” Laevsky asked irritably.
    

      “Because you took her away from her husband and made yourself
      responsible for her.”
    

      “But now I tell you in plain Russian, I don’t love her!”
    

      “Well, if you’ve no love, show her proper respect, consider
      her wishes. . . .”
    

      “‘Show her respect, consider her wishes,’” Laevsky
      mimicked him. “As though she were some Mother Superior! . . . You
      are a poor psychologist and physiologist if you think that living with a
      woman one can get off with nothing but respect and consideration. What a
      woman thinks most of is her bedroom.”
    

      “Vanya, Vanya!” said Samoylenko, overcome with confusion.
    

      “You are an elderly child, a theorist, while I am an old man in
      spite of my years, and practical, and we shall never understand one
      another. We had better drop this conversation. Mustapha!” Laevsky
      shouted to the waiter. “What’s our bill?”
    

      “No, no . . .” the doctor cried in dismay, clutching Laevsky’s
      arm. “It is for me to pay. I ordered it. Make it out to me,”
      he cried to Mustapha.
    

      The friends got up and walked in silence along the sea-front. When they
      reached the boulevard, they stopped and shook hands at parting.
    

      “You are awfully spoilt, my friend!” Samoylenko sighed.
      “Fate has sent you a young, beautiful, cultured woman, and you
      refuse the gift, while if God were to give me a crooked old woman, how
      pleased I should be if only she were kind and affectionate! I would live
      with her in my vineyard and . . .”
    

      Samoylenko caught himself up and said:
    

      “And she might get the samovar ready for me there, the old hag.”
    

      After parting with Laevsky he walked along the boulevard. When, bulky and
      majestic, with a stern expression on his face, he walked along the
      boulevard in his snow-white tunic and superbly polished boots, squaring
      his chest, decorated with the Vladimir cross on a ribbon, he was very much
      pleased with himself, and it seemed as though the whole world were looking
      at him with pleasure. Without turning his head, he looked to each side and
      thought that the boulevard was extremely well laid out; that the young
      cypress-trees, the eucalyptuses, and the ugly, anemic palm-trees were very
      handsome and would in time give abundant shade; that the Circassians were
      an honest and hospitable people.
    

      “It’s strange that Laevsky does not like the Caucasus,”
      he thought, “very strange.”
    

      Five soldiers, carrying rifles, met him and saluted him. On the right side
      of the boulevard the wife of a local official was walking along the
      pavement with her son, a schoolboy.
    

      “Good-morning, Marya Konstantinovna,” Samoylenko shouted to
      her with a pleasant smile. “Have you been to bathe? Ha, ha, ha! . .
      . My respects to Nikodim Alexandritch!”
    

      And he went on, still smiling pleasantly, but seeing an assistant of the
      military hospital coming towards him, he suddenly frowned, stopped him,
      and asked:
    

      “Is there any one in the hospital?”
    

      “No one, Your Excellency.”
    

      “Eh?”
    

      “No one, Your Excellency.”
    

      “Very well, run along. . . .”
    

      Swaying majestically, he made for the lemonade stall, where sat a
      full-bosomed old Jewess, who gave herself out to be a Georgian, and said
      to her as loudly as though he were giving the word of command to a
      regiment:
    

      “Be so good as to give me some soda-water!”
    

      II
    

      Laevsky’s not loving Nadyezhda Fyodorovna showed itself chiefly in
      the fact that everything she said or did seemed to him a lie, or
      equivalent to a lie, and everything he read against women and love seemed
      to him to apply perfectly to himself, to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and her
      husband. When he returned home, she was sitting at the window, dressed and
      with her hair done, and with a preoccupied face was drinking coffee and
      turning over the leaves of a fat magazine; and he thought the drinking of
      coffee was not such a remarkable event that she need put on a preoccupied
      expression over it, and that she had been wasting her time doing her hair
      in a fashionable style, as there was no one here to attract and no need to
      be attractive. And in the magazine he saw nothing but falsity. He thought
      she had dressed and done her hair so as to look handsomer, and was reading
      in order to seem clever.
    

      “Will it be all right for me to go to bathe to-day?” she said.
    

      “Why? There won’t be an earthquake whether you go or not, I
      suppose . . . .”
    

      “No, I only ask in case the doctor should be vexed.”
    

      “Well, ask the doctor, then; I’m not a doctor.”
    

      On this occasion what displeased Laevsky most in Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was
      her white open neck and the little curls at the back of her head. And he
      remembered that when Anna Karenin got tired of her husband, what she
      disliked most of all was his ears, and thought: “How true it is, how
      true!”
    

      Feeling weak and as though his head were perfectly empty, he went into his
      study, lay down on his sofa, and covered his face with a handkerchief that
      he might not be bothered by the flies. Despondent and oppressive thoughts
      always about the same thing trailed slowly across his brain like a long
      string of waggons on a gloomy autumn evening, and he sank into a state of
      drowsy oppression. It seemed to him that he had wronged Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna and her husband, and that it was through his fault that her
      husband had died. It seemed to him that he had sinned against his own
      life, which he had ruined, against the world of lofty ideas, of learning,
      and of work, and he conceived that wonderful world as real and possible,
      not on this sea-front with hungry Turks and lazy mountaineers sauntering
      upon it, but there in the North, where there were operas, theatres,
      newspapers, and all kinds of intellectual activity. One could only there—not
      here—be honest, intelligent, lofty, and pure. He accused himself of
      having no ideal, no guiding principle in life, though he had a dim
      understanding now what it meant. Two years before, when he fell in love
      with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, it seemed to him that he had only to go with
      her as his wife to the Caucasus, and he would be saved from vulgarity and
      emptiness; in the same way now, he was convinced that he had only to part
      from Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and to go to Petersburg, and he would get
      everything he wanted.
    

      “Run away,” he muttered to himself, sitting up and biting his
      nails. “Run away!”
    

      He pictured in his imagination how he would go aboard the steamer and then
      would have some lunch, would drink some cold beer, would talk on deck with
      ladies, then would get into the train at Sevastopol and set off. Hurrah
      for freedom! One station after another would flash by, the air would keep
      growing colder and keener, then the birches and the fir-trees, then Kursk,
      Moscow. . . . In the restaurants cabbage soup, mutton with kasha,
      sturgeon, beer, no more Asiaticism, but Russia, real Russia. The
      passengers in the train would talk about trade, new singers, the
      Franco-Russian entente; on all sides there would be the feeling of
      keen, cultured, intellectual, eager life. . . . Hasten on, on! At last
      Nevsky Prospect, and Great Morskaya Street, and then Kovensky Place, where
      he used to live at one time when he was a student, the dear grey sky, the
      drizzling rain, the drenched cabmen. . . .
    

      “Ivan Andreitch!” some one called from the next room. “Are
      you at home?”
    

      “I’m here,” Laevsky responded. “What do you want?”
    

      “Papers.”
    

      Laevsky got up languidly, feeling giddy, walked into the other room,
      yawning and shuffling with his slippers. There, at the open window that
      looked into the street, stood one of his young fellow-clerks, laying out
      some government documents on the window-sill.
    

      “One minute, my dear fellow,” Laevsky said softly, and he went
      to look for the ink; returning to the window, he signed the papers without
      looking at them, and said: “It’s hot!”
    

      “Yes. Are you coming to-day?”
    

      “I don’t think so. . . . I’m not quite well. Tell
      Sheshkovsky that I will come and see him after dinner.”
    

      The clerk went away. Laevsky lay down on his sofa again and began
      thinking:
    

      “And so I must weigh all the circumstances and reflect on them.
      Before I go away from here I ought to pay up my debts. I owe about two
      thousand roubles. I have no money. . . . Of course, that’s not
      important; I shall pay part now, somehow, and I shall send the rest,
      later, from Petersburg. The chief point is Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. . . .
      First of all we must define our relations. . . . Yes.”
    

      A little later he was considering whether it would not be better to go to
      Samoylenko for advice.
    

      “I might go,” he thought, “but what use would there be
      in it? I shall only say something inappropriate about boudoirs, about
      women, about what is honest or dishonest. What’s the use of talking
      about what is honest or dishonest, if I must make haste to save my life,
      if I am suffocating in this cursed slavery and am killing myself? . . .
      One must realise at last that to go on leading the life I do is something
      so base and so cruel that everything else seems petty and trivial beside
      it. To run away,” he muttered, sitting down, “to run away.”
    

      The deserted seashore, the insatiable heat, and the monotony of the smoky
      lilac mountains, ever the same and silent, everlastingly solitary,
      overwhelmed him with depression, and, as it were, made him drowsy and
      sapped his energy. He was perhaps very clever, talented, remarkably
      honest; perhaps if the sea and the mountains had not closed him in on all
      sides, he might have become an excellent Zemstvo leader, a statesman, an
      orator, a political writer, a saint. Who knows? If so, was it not stupid
      to argue whether it were honest or dishonest when a gifted and useful man—an
      artist or musician, for instance—to escape from prison, breaks a
      wall and deceives his jailers? Anything is honest when a man is in such a
      position.
    

      At two o’clock Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna sat down to dinner.
      When the cook gave them rice and tomato soup, Laevsky said:
    

      “The same thing every day. Why not have cabbage soup?”
    

      “There are no cabbages.”
    

      “It’s strange. Samoylenko has cabbage soup and Marya
      Konstantinovna has cabbage soup, and only I am obliged to eat this mawkish
      mess. We can’t go on like this, darling.”
    

      As is common with the vast majority of husbands and wives, not a single
      dinner had in earlier days passed without scenes and fault-finding between
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and Laevsky; but ever since Laevsky had made up his
      mind that he did not love her, he had tried to give way to Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna in everything, spoke to her gently and politely, smiled, and
      called her “darling.”
    

      “This soup tastes like liquorice,” he said, smiling; he made
      an effort to control himself and seem amiable, but could not refrain from
      saying: “Nobody looks after the housekeeping. . . . If you are too
      ill or busy with reading, let me look after the cooking.”
    

      In earlier days she would have said to him, “Do by all means,”
      or, “I see you want to turn me into a cook”; but now she only
      looked at him timidly and flushed crimson.
    

      “Well, how do you feel to-day?” he asked kindly.
    

      “I am all right to-day. There is nothing but a little weakness.”
    

      “You must take care of yourself, darling. I am awfully anxious about
      you.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was ill in some way. Samoylenko said she had
      intermittent fever, and gave her quinine; the other doctor, Ustimovitch, a
      tall, lean, unsociable man, who used to sit at home in the daytime, and in
      the evenings walk slowly up and down on the sea-front coughing, with his
      hands folded behind him and a cane stretched along his back, was of
      opinion that she had a female complaint, and prescribed warm compresses.
      In old days, when Laevsky loved her, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s illness
      had excited his pity and terror; now he saw falsity even in her illness.
      Her yellow, sleepy face, her lustreless eyes, her apathetic expression,
      and the yawning that always followed her attacks of fever, and the fact
      that during them she lay under a shawl and looked more like a boy than a
      woman, and that it was close and stuffy in her room—all this, in his
      opinion, destroyed the illusion and was an argument against love and
      marriage.
    

      The next dish given him was spinach with hard-boiled eggs, while Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, as an invalid, had jelly and milk. When with a preoccupied
      face she touched the jelly with a spoon and then began languidly eating
      it, sipping milk, and he heard her swallowing, he was possessed by such an
      overwhelming aversion that it made his head tingle. He recognised that
      such a feeling would be an insult even to a dog, but he was angry, not
      with himself but with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, for arousing such a feeling,
      and he understood why lovers sometimes murder their mistresses. He would
      not murder her, of course, but if he had been on a jury now, he would have
      acquitted the murderer.
    

      “Merci, darling,” he said after dinner, and kissed Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna on the forehead.
    

      Going back into his study, he spent five minutes in walking to and fro,
      looking at his boots; then he sat down on his sofa and muttered:
    

      “Run away, run away! We must define the position and run away!”
    

      He lay down on the sofa and recalled again that Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s
      husband had died, perhaps, by his fault.
    

      “To blame a man for loving a woman, or ceasing to love a woman, is
      stupid,” he persuaded himself, lying down and raising his legs in
      order to put on his high boots. “Love and hatred are not under our
      control. As for her husband, maybe I was in an indirect way one of the
      causes of his death; but again, is it my fault that I fell in love with
      his wife and she with me?”
    

      Then he got up, and finding his cap, set off to the lodgings of his
      colleague, Sheshkovsky, where the Government clerks met every day to play
      vint and drink beer.
    

      “My indecision reminds me of Hamlet,” thought Laevsky on the
      way. “How truly Shakespeare describes it! Ah, how truly!”
    

      III
    

      For the sake of sociability and from sympathy for the hard plight of
      newcomers without families, who, as there was not an hotel in the town,
      had nowhere to dine, Dr. Samoylenko kept a sort of table d’hÃ´te. At
      this time there were only two men who habitually dined with him: a young
      zoologist called Von Koren, who had come for the summer to the Black Sea
      to study the embryology of the medusa, and a deacon called Pobyedov, who
      had only just left the seminary and been sent to the town to take the duty
      of the old deacon who had gone away for a cure. Each of them paid twelve
      roubles a month for their dinner and supper, and Samoylenko made them
      promise to turn up at two o’clock punctually.
    

      Von Koren was usually the first to appear. He sat down in the drawing-room
      in silence, and taking an album from the table, began attentively
      scrutinising the faded photographs of unknown men in full trousers and
      top-hats, and ladies in crinolines and caps. Samoylenko only remembered a
      few of them by name, and of those whom he had forgotten he said with a
      sigh: “A very fine fellow, remarkably intelligent!” When he
      had finished with the album, Von Koren took a pistol from the whatnot, and
      screwing up his left eye, took deliberate aim at the portrait of Prince
      Vorontsov, or stood still at the looking-glass and gazed a long time at
      his swarthy face, his big forehead, and his black hair, which curled like
      a negro’s, and his shirt of dull-coloured cotton with big flowers on
      it like a Persian rug, and the broad leather belt he wore instead of a
      waistcoat. The contemplation of his own image seemed to afford him almost
      more satisfaction than looking at photographs or playing with the pistols.
      He was very well satisfied with his face, and his becomingly clipped
      beard, and the broad shoulders, which were unmistakable evidence of his
      excellent health and physical strength. He was satisfied, too, with his
      stylish get-up, from the cravat, which matched the colour of his shirt,
      down to his brown boots.
    

      While he was looking at the album and standing before the glass, at that
      moment, in the kitchen and in the passage near, Samoylenko, without his
      coat and waistcoat, with his neck bare, excited and bathed in
      perspiration, was bustling about the tables, mixing the salad, or making
      some sauce, or preparing meat, cucumbers, and onion for the cold soup,
      while he glared fiercely at the orderly who was helping him, and
      brandished first a knife and then a spoon at him.
    

      “Give me the vinegar!” he said. “That’s not the
      vinegar—it’s the salad oil!” he shouted, stamping.
      “Where are you off to, you brute?”
    

      “To get the butter, Your Excellency,” answered the flustered
      orderly in a cracked voice.
    

      “Make haste; it’s in the cupboard! And tell Daria to put some
      fennel in the jar with the cucumbers! Fennel! Cover the cream up, gaping
      laggard, or the flies will get into it!”
    

      And the whole house seemed resounding with his shouts. When it was ten or
      fifteen minutes to two the deacon would come in; he was a lanky young man
      of twenty-two, with long hair, with no beard and a hardly perceptible
      moustache. Going into the drawing-room, he crossed himself before the
      ikon, smiled, and held out his hand to Von Koren.
    

      “Good-morning,” the zoologist said coldly. “Where have
      you been?”
    

      “I’ve been catching sea-gudgeon in the harbour.”
    

      “Oh, of course. . . . Evidently, deacon, you will never be busy with
      work.”
    

      “Why not? Work is not like a bear; it doesn’t run off into the
      woods,” said the deacon, smiling and thrusting his hands into the
      very deep pockets of his white cassock.
    

      “There’s no one to whip you!” sighed the zoologist.
    

      Another fifteen or twenty minutes passed and they were not called to
      dinner, and they could still hear the orderly running into the kitchen and
      back again, noisily treading with his boots, and Samoylenko shouting:
    

      “Put it on the table! Where are your wits? Wash it first.”
    

      The famished deacon and Von Koren began tapping on the floor with their
      heels, expressing in this way their impatience like the audience at a
      theatre. At last the door opened and the harassed orderly announced that
      dinner was ready! In the dining-room they were met by Samoylenko, crimson
      in the face, wrathful, perspiring from the heat of the kitchen; he looked
      at them furiously, and with an expression of horror, took the lid off the
      soup tureen and helped each of them to a plateful; and only when he was
      convinced that they were eating it with relish and liked it, he gave a
      sigh of relief and settled himself in his deep arm-chair. His face looked
      blissful and his eyes grew moist. . . . He deliberately poured himself out
      a glass of vodka and said:
    

      “To the health of the younger generation.”
    

      After his conversation with Laevsky, from early morning till dinner
      Samoylenko had been conscious of a load at his heart, although he was in
      the best of humours; he felt sorry for Laevsky and wanted to help him.
      After drinking a glass of vodka before the soup, he heaved a sigh and
      said:
    

      “I saw Vanya Laevsky to-day. He is having a hard time of it, poor
      fellow! The material side of life is not encouraging for him, and the
      worst of it is all this psychology is too much for him. I’m sorry
      for the lad.”
    

      “Well, that is a person I am not sorry for,” said Von Koren.
      “If that charming individual were drowning, I would push him under
      with a stick and say, ‘Drown, brother, drown away.’ . . .”
    

      “That’s untrue. You wouldn’t do it.”
    

      “Why do you think that?” The zoologist shrugged his shoulders.
      “I’m just as capable of a good action as you are.”
    

      “Is drowning a man a good action?” asked the deacon, and he
      laughed.
    

      “Laevsky? Yes.”
    

      “I think there is something amiss with the soup . . .” said
      Samoylenko, anxious to change the conversation.
    

      “Laevsky is absolutely pernicious and is as dangerous to society as
      the cholera microbe,” Von Koren went on. “To drown him would
      be a service.”
    

      “It does not do you credit to talk like that about your neighbour.
      Tell us: what do you hate him for?”
    

      “Don’t talk nonsense, doctor. To hate and despise a microbe is
      stupid, but to look upon everybody one meets without distinction as one’s
      neighbour, whatever happens—thanks very much, that is equivalent to
      giving up criticism, renouncing a straightforward attitude to people,
      washing one’s hands of responsibility, in fact! I consider your
      Laevsky a blackguard; I do not conceal it, and I am perfectly
      conscientious in treating him as such. Well, you look upon him as your
      neighbour—and you may kiss him if you like: you look upon him as
      your neighbour, and that means that your attitude to him is the same as to
      me and to the deacon; that is no attitude at all. You are equally
      indifferent to all.”
    

      “To call a man a blackguard!” muttered Samoylenko, frowning
      with distaste—“that is so wrong that I can’t find words
      for it!”
    

      “People are judged by their actions,” Von Koren continued.
      “Now you decide, deacon. . . . I am going to talk to you, deacon.
      Mr. Laevsky’s career lies open before you, like a long Chinese
      puzzle, and you can read it from beginning to end. What has he been doing
      these two years that he has been living here? We will reckon his doings on
      our fingers. First, he has taught the inhabitants of the town to play vint:
      two years ago that game was unknown here; now they all play it from
      morning till late at night, even the women and the boys. Secondly, he has
      taught the residents to drink beer, which was not known here either; the
      inhabitants are indebted to him for the knowledge of various sorts of
      spirits, so that now they can distinguish Kospelov’s vodka from
      Smirnov’s No. 21, blindfold. Thirdly, in former days, people here
      made love to other men’s wives in secret, from the same motives as
      thieves steal in secret and not openly; adultery was considered something
      they were ashamed to make a public display of. Laevsky has come as a
      pioneer in that line; he lives with another man’s wife openly. . . .
      Fourthly . . .”
    

      Von Koren hurriedly ate up his soup and gave his plate to the orderly.
    

      “I understood Laevsky from the first month of our acquaintance,”
      he went on, addressing the deacon. “We arrived here at the same
      time. Men like him are very fond of friendship, intimacy, solidarity, and
      all the rest of it, because they always want company for vint,
      drinking, and eating; besides, they are talkative and must have listeners.
      We made friends—that is, he turned up every day, hindered me
      working, and indulged in confidences in regard to his mistress. From the
      first he struck me by his exceptional falsity, which simply made me sick.
      As a friend I pitched into him, asking him why he drank too much, why he
      lived beyond his means and got into debt, why he did nothing and read
      nothing, why he had so little culture and so little knowledge; and in
      answer to all my questions he used to smile bitterly, sigh, and say:
      ‘I am a failure, a superfluous man’; or: ‘What do you
      expect, my dear fellow, from us, the debris of the serf-owning class?’
      or: ‘We are degenerate. . . .’ Or he would begin a long
      rigmarole about Onyegin, Petchorin, Byron’s Cain, and Bazarov, of
      whom he would say: ‘They are our fathers in flesh and in spirit.’
      So we are to understand that it was not his fault that Government
      envelopes lay unopened in his office for weeks together, and that he drank
      and taught others to drink, but Onyegin, Petchorin, and Turgenev, who had
      invented the failure and the superfluous man, were responsible for it. The
      cause of his extreme dissoluteness and unseemliness lies, do you see, not
      in himself, but somewhere outside in space. And so—an ingenious
      idea!—it is not only he who is dissolute, false, and disgusting, but
      we . . . ‘we men of the eighties,’ ‘we the spiritless,
      nervous offspring of the serf-owning class’; ‘civilisation has
      crippled us’ . . . in fact, we are to understand that such a great
      man as Laevsky is great even in his fall: that his dissoluteness, his lack
      of culture and of moral purity, is a phenomenon of natural history,
      sanctified by inevitability; that the causes of it are world-wide,
      elemental; and that we ought to hang up a lamp before Laevsky, since he is
      the fated victim of the age, of influences, of heredity, and so on. All
      the officials and their ladies were in ecstasies when they listened to
      him, and I could not make out for a long time what sort of man I had to
      deal with, a cynic or a clever rogue. Such types as he, on the surface
      intellectual with a smattering of education and a great deal of talk about
      their own nobility, are very clever in posing as exceptionally complex
      natures.”
    

      “Hold your tongue!” Samoylenko flared up. “I will not
      allow a splendid fellow to be spoken ill of in my presence!”
    

      “Don’t interrupt, Alexandr Daviditch,” said Von Koren
      coldly; “I am just finishing. Laevsky is by no means a complex
      organism. Here is his moral skeleton: in the morning, slippers, a bathe,
      and coffee; then till dinner-time, slippers, a constitutional, and
      conversation; at two o’clock slippers, dinner, and wine; at five o’clock
      a bathe, tea and wine, then vint and lying; at ten o’clock
      supper and wine; and after midnight sleep and la femme. His
      existence is confined within this narrow programme like an egg within its
      shell. Whether he walks or sits, is angry, writes, rejoices, it may all be
      reduced to wine, cards, slippers, and women. Woman plays a fatal,
      overwhelming part in his life. He tells us himself that at thirteen he was
      in love; that when he was a student in his first year he was living with a
      lady who had a good influence over him, and to whom he was indebted for
      his musical education. In his second year he bought a prostitute from a
      brothel and raised her to his level—that is, took her as his kept
      mistress, and she lived with him for six months and then ran away back to
      the brothel-keeper, and her flight caused him much spiritual suffering.
      Alas! his sufferings were so great that he had to leave the university and
      spend two years at home doing nothing. But this was all for the best. At
      home he made friends with a widow who advised him to leave the Faculty of
      Jurisprudence and go into the Faculty of Arts. And so he did. When he had
      taken his degree, he fell passionately in love with his present . . . what’s
      her name? . . . married lady, and was obliged to flee with her here to the
      Caucasus for the sake of his ideals, he would have us believe, seeing that
      . . . to-morrow, if not to-day, he will be tired of her and flee back
      again to Petersburg, and that, too, will be for the sake of his ideals.”
    

      “How do you know?” growled Samoylenko, looking angrily at the
      zoologist. “You had better eat your dinner.”
    

      The next course consisted of boiled mullet with Polish sauce. Samoylenko
      helped each of his companions to a whole mullet and poured out the sauce
      with his own hand. Two minutes passed in silence.
    

      “Woman plays an essential part in the life of every man,” said
      the deacon. “You can’t help that.”
    

      “Yes, but to what degree? For each of us woman means mother, sister,
      wife, friend. To Laevsky she is everything, and at the same time nothing
      but a mistress. She—that is, cohabitation with her— is the
      happiness and object of his life; he is gay, sad, bored, disenchanted—on
      account of woman; his life grows disagreeable —woman is to blame;
      the dawn of a new life begins to glow, ideals turn up—and again look
      for the woman. . . . He only derives enjoyment from books and pictures in
      which there is woman. Our age is, to his thinking, poor and inferior to
      the forties and the sixties only because we do not know how to abandon
      ourselves obviously to the passion and ecstasy of love. These voluptuaries
      must have in their brains a special growth of the nature of sarcoma, which
      stifles the brain and directs their whole psychology. Watch Laevsky when
      he is sitting anywhere in company. You notice: when one raises any general
      question in his presence, for instance, about the cell or instinct, he
      sits apart, and neither speaks nor listens; he looks languid and
      disillusioned; nothing has any interest for him, everything is vulgar and
      trivial. But as soon as you speak of male and female—for instance,
      of the fact that the female spider, after fertilisation, devours the male—his
      eyes glow with curiosity, his face brightens, and the man revives, in
      fact. All his thoughts, however noble, lofty, or neutral they may be, they
      all have one point of resemblance. You walk along the street with him and
      meet a donkey, for instance. . . . ‘Tell me, please,’ he asks,
      ‘what would happen if you mated a donkey with a camel?’ And
      his dreams! Has he told you of his dreams? It is magnificent! First, he
      dreams that he is married to the moon, then that he is summoned before the
      police and ordered to live with a guitar . . .”
    

      The deacon burst into resounding laughter; Samoylenko frowned and wrinkled
      up his face angrily so as not to laugh, but could not restrain himself,
      and laughed.
    

      “And it’s all nonsense!” he said, wiping his tears.
      “Yes, by Jove, it’s nonsense!”
    

      IV
    

      The deacon was very easily amused, and laughed at every trifle till he got
      a stitch in his side, till he was helpless. It seemed as though he only
      liked to be in people’s company because there was a ridiculous side
      to them, and because they might be given ridiculous nicknames. He had
      nicknamed Samoylenko “the tarantula,” his orderly “the
      drake,” and was in ecstasies when on one occasion Von Koren spoke of
      Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna as “Japanese monkeys.” He
      watched people’s faces greedily, listened without bGlinking, and it
      could be seen that his eyes filled with laughter and his face was tense
      with expectation of the moment when he could let himself go and burst into
      laughter.
    

      “He is a corrupt and depraved type,” the zoologist continued,
      while the deacon kept his eyes riveted on his face, expecting he would say
      something funny. “It is not often one can meet with such a
      nonentity. In body he is inert, feeble, prematurely old, while in
      intellect he differs in no respect from a fat shopkeeper’s wife who
      does nothing but eat, drink, and sleep on a feather-bed, and who keeps her
      coachman as a lover.”
    

      The deacon began guffawing again.
    

      “Don’t laugh, deacon,” said Von Koren. “It grows
      stupid, at last. I should not have paid attention to his insignificance,”
      he went on, after waiting till the deacon had left off laughing; “I
      should have passed him by if he were not so noxious and dangerous. His
      noxiousness lies first of all in the fact that he has great success with
      women, and so threatens to leave descendants—that is, to present the
      world with a dozen Laevskys as feeble and as depraved as himself.
      Secondly, he is in the highest degree contaminating. I have spoken to you
      already of vint and beer. In another year or two he will dominate
      the whole Caucasian coast. You know how the mass, especially its middle
      stratum, believe in intellectuality, in a university education, in
      gentlemanly manners, and in literary language. Whatever filthy thing he
      did, they would all believe that it was as it should be, since he is an
      intellectual man, of liberal ideas and university education. What is more,
      he is a failure, a superfluous man, a neurasthenic, a victim of the age,
      and that means he can do anything. He is a charming fellow, a regular good
      sort, he is so genuinely indulgent to human weaknesses; he is compliant,
      accommodating, easy and not proud; one can drink with him and gossip and
      talk evil of people. . . . The masses, always inclined to anthropomorphism
      in religion and morals, like best of all the little gods who have the same
      weaknesses as themselves. Only think what a wide field he has for
      contamination! Besides, he is not a bad actor and is a clever hypocrite,
      and knows very well how to twist things round. Only take his little shifts
      and dodges, his attitude to civilisation, for instance. He has scarcely
      sniffed at civilisation, yet: ‘Ah, how we have been crippled by
      civilisation! Ah, how I envy those savages, those children of nature, who
      know nothing of civilisation!’ We are to understand, you see, that
      at one time, in ancient days, he has been devoted to civilisation with his
      whole soul, has served it, has sounded it to its depths, but it has
      exhausted him, disillusioned him, deceived him; he is a Faust, do you see?—a
      second Tolstoy. . . . As for Schopenhauer and Spencer, he treats them like
      small boys and slaps them on the shoulder in a fatherly way: ‘Well,
      what do you say, old Spencer?’ He has not read Spencer, of course,
      but how charming he is when with light, careless irony he says of his lady
      friend: ‘She has read Spencer!’ And they all listen to him,
      and no one cares to understand that this charlatan has not the right to
      kiss the sole of Spencer’s foot, let alone speaking about him in
      that tone! Sapping the foundations of civilisation, of authority, of other
      people’s altars, spattering them with filth, winking jocosely at
      them only to justify and conceal one’s own rottenness and moral
      poverty is only possible for a very vain, base, and nasty creature.”
    

      “I don’t know what it is you expect of him, Kolya,” said
      Samoylenko, looking at the zoologist, not with anger now, but with a
      guilty air. “He is a man the same as every one else. Of course, he
      has his weaknesses, but he is abreast of modern ideas, is in the service,
      is of use to his country. Ten years ago there was an old fellow serving as
      agent here, a man of the greatest intelligence . . . and he used to say .
      . .”
    

      “Nonsense, nonsense!” the zoologist interrupted. “You
      say he is in the service; but how does he serve? Do you mean to tell me
      that things have been done better because he is here, and the officials
      are more punctual, honest, and civil? On the contrary, he has only
      sanctioned their slackness by his prestige as an intellectual university
      man. He is only punctual on the 20th of the month, when he gets his
      salary; on the other days he lounges about at home in slippers and tries
      to look as if he were doing the Government a great service by living in
      the Caucasus. No, Alexandr Daviditch, don’t stick up for him. You
      are insincere from beginning to end. If you really loved him and
      considered him your neighbour, you would above all not be indifferent to
      his weaknesses, you would not be indulgent to them, but for his own sake
      would try to make him innocuous.”
    

      “That is?”
    

      “Innocuous. Since he is incorrigible, he can only be made innocuous
      in one way. . . .” Von Koren passed his finger round his throat.
      “Or he might be drowned . . .”, he added. “In the
      interests of humanity and in their own interests, such people ought to be
      destroyed. They certainly ought.”
    

      “What are you saying?” muttered Samoylenko, getting up and
      looking with amazement at the zoologist’s calm, cold face. “Deacon,
      what is he saying? Why—are you in your senses?”
    

      “I don’t insist on the death penalty,” said Von Koren.
      “If it is proved that it is pernicious, devise something else. If we
      can’t destroy Laevsky, why then, isolate him, make him harmless,
      send him to hard labour.”
    

      “What are you saying!” said Samoylenko in horror. “With
      pepper, with pepper,” he cried in a voice of despair, seeing that
      the deacon was eating stuffed aubergines without pepper. “You with
      your great intellect, what are you saying! Send our friend, a proud
      intellectual man, to penal servitude!”
    

      “Well, if he is proud and tries to resist, put him in fetters!”
    

      Samoylenko could not utter a word, and only twiddled his fingers; the
      deacon looked at his flabbergasted and really absurd face, and laughed.
    

      “Let us leave off talking of that,” said the zoologist.
      “Only remember one thing, Alexandr Daviditch: primitive man was
      preserved from such as Laevsky by the struggle for existence and by
      natural selection; now our civilisation has considerably weakened the
      struggle and the selection, and we ought to look after the destruction of
      the rotten and worthless for ourselves; otherwise, when the Laevskys
      multiply, civilisation will perish and mankind will degenerate utterly. It
      will be our fault.”
    

      “If it depends on drowning and hanging,” said Samoylenko,
      “damnation take your civilisation, damnation take your humanity!
      Damnation take it! I tell you what: you are a very learned and intelligent
      man and the pride of your country, but the Germans have ruined you. Yes,
      the Germans! The Germans!”
    

      Since Samoylenko had left Dorpat, where he had studied medicine, he had
      rarely seen a German and had not read a single German book, but, in his
      opinion, every harmful idea in politics or science was due to the Germans.
      Where he had got this notion he could not have said himself, but he held
      it firmly.
    

      “Yes, the Germans!” he repeated once more. “Come and
      have some tea.”
    

      All three stood up, and putting on their hats, went out into the little
      garden, and sat there under the shade of the light green maples, the
      pear-trees, and a chestnut-tree. The zoologist and the deacon sat on a
      bench by the table, while Samoylenko sank into a deep wicker chair with a
      sloping back. The orderly handed them tea, jam, and a bottle of syrup.
    

      It was very hot, thirty degrees RÃ©aumur in the shade. The sultry air was
      stagnant and motionless, and a long spider-web, stretching from the
      chestnut-tree to the ground, hung limply and did not stir.
    

      The deacon took up the guitar, which was constantly lying on the ground
      near the table, tuned it, and began singing softly in a thin voice:
    

      “‘Gathered round the tavern were the seminary lads,’”
    

      but instantly subsided, overcome by the heat, mopped his brow and glanced
      upwards at the blazing blue sky. Samoylenko grew drowsy; the sultry heat,
      the stillness and the delicious after-dinner languor, which quickly
      pervaded all his limbs, made him feel heavy and sleepy; his arms dropped
      at his sides, his eyes grew small, his head sank on his breast. He looked
      with almost tearful tenderness at Von Koren and the deacon, and muttered:
    

      “The younger generation. . . A scientific star and a luminary of the
      Church. . . . I shouldn’t wonder if the long-skirted alleluia will
      be shooting up into a bishop; I dare say I may come to kissing his hand. .
      . . Well . . . please God. . . .”
    

      Soon a snore was heard. Von Koren and the deacon finished their tea and
      went out into the street.
    

      “Are you going to the harbour again to catch sea-gudgeon?”
      asked the zoologist.
    

      “No, it’s too hot.”
    

      “Come and see me. You can pack up a parcel and copy something for
      me. By the way, we must have a talk about what you are to do. You must
      work, deacon. You can’t go on like this.”
    

      “Your words are just and logical,” said the deacon. “But
      my laziness finds an excuse in the circumstances of my present life. You
      know yourself that an uncertain position has a great tendency to make
      people apathetic. God only knows whether I have been sent here for a time
      or permanently. I am living here in uncertainty, while my wife is
      vegetating at her father’s and is missing me. And I must confess my
      brain is melting with the heat.”
    

      “That’s all nonsense,” said the zoologist. “You
      can get used to the heat, and you can get used to being without the
      deaconess. You mustn’t be slack; you must pull yourself together.”
    

      V
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna went to bathe in the morning, and her cook, Olga,
      followed her with a jug, a copper basin, towels, and a sponge. In the bay
      stood two unknown steamers with dirty white funnels, obviously foreign
      cargo vessels. Some men dressed in white and wearing white shoes were
      walking along the harbour, shouting loudly in French, and were answered
      from the steamers. The bells were ringing briskly in the little church of
      the town.
    

      “To-day is Sunday!” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna remembered with
      pleasure.
    

      She felt perfectly well, and was in a gay holiday humour. In a new
      loose-fitting dress of coarse thick tussore silk, and a big wide-brimmed
      straw hat which was bent down over her ears, so that her face looked out
      as though from a basket, she fancied she looked very charming. She thought
      that in the whole town there was only one young, pretty, intellectual
      woman, and that was herself, and that she was the only one who knew how to
      dress herself cheaply, elegantly, and with taste. That dress, for example,
      cost only twenty-two roubles, and yet how charming it was! In the whole
      town she was the only one who could be attractive, while there were
      numbers of men, so they must all, whether they would or not, be envious of
      Laevsky.
    

      She was glad that of late Laevsky had been cold to her, reserved and
      polite, and at times even harsh and rude; in the past she had met all his
      outbursts, all his contemptuous, cold or strange incomprehensible glances,
      with tears, reproaches, and threats to leave him or to starve herself to
      death; now she only blushed, looked guiltily at him, and was glad he was
      not affectionate to her. If he had abused her, threatened her, it would
      have been better and pleasanter, since she felt hopelessly guilty towards
      him. She felt she was to blame, in the first place, for not sympathising
      with the dreams of a life of hard work, for the sake of which he had given
      up Petersburg and had come here to the Caucasus, and she was convinced
      that he had been angry with her of late for precisely that. When she was
      travelling to the Caucasus, it seemed that she would find here on the
      first day a cosy nook by the sea, a snug little garden with shade, with
      birds, with little brooks, where she could grow flowers and vegetables,
      rear ducks and hens, entertain her neighbours, doctor poor peasants and
      distribute little books amongst them. It had turned out that the Caucasus
      was nothing but bare mountains, forests, and huge valleys, where it took a
      long time and a great deal of effort to find anything and settle down;
      that there were no neighbours of any sort; that it was very hot and one
      might be robbed. Laevsky had been in no hurry to obtain a piece of land;
      she was glad of it, and they seemed to be in a tacit compact never to
      allude to a life of hard work. He was silent about it, she thought,
      because he was angry with her for being silent about it.
    

      In the second place, she had without his knowledge during those two years
      bought various trifles to the value of three hundred roubles at Atchmianov’s
      shop. She had bought the things by degrees, at one time materials, at
      another time silk or a parasol, and the debt had grown imperceptibly.
    

      “I will tell him about it to-day . . .”, she used to decide,
      but at once reflected that in Laevsky’s present mood it would hardly
      be convenient to talk to him of debts.
    

      Thirdly, she had on two occasions in Laevsky’s absence received a
      visit from Kirilin, the police captain: once in the morning when Laevsky
      had gone to bathe, and another time at midnight when he was playing cards.
      Remembering this, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna flushed crimson, and looked round
      at the cook as though she might overhear her thoughts. The long,
      insufferably hot, wearisome days, beautiful languorous evenings and
      stifling nights, and the whole manner of living, when from morning to
      night one is at a loss to fill up the useless hours, and the persistent
      thought that she was the prettiest young woman in the town, and that her
      youth was passing and being wasted, and Laevsky himself, though honest and
      idealistic, always the same, always lounging about in his slippers, biting
      his nails, and wearying her with his caprices, led by degrees to her
      becoming possessed by desire, and as though she were mad, she thought of
      nothing else day and night. Breathing, looking, walking, she felt nothing
      but desire. The sound of the sea told her she must love; the darkness of
      evening—the same; the mountains—the same. . . . And when
      Kirilin began paying her attentions, she had neither the power nor the
      wish to resist, and surrendered to him. . . .
    

      Now the foreign steamers and the men in white reminded her for some reason
      of a huge hall; together with the shouts of French she heard the strains
      of a waltz, and her bosom heaved with unaccountable delight. She longed to
      dance and talk French.
    

      She reflected joyfully that there was nothing terrible about her
      infidelity. Her soul had no part in her infidelity; she still loved
      Laevsky, and that was proved by the fact that she was jealous of him, was
      sorry for him, and missed him when he was away. Kirilin had turned out to
      be very mediocre, rather coarse though handsome; everything was broken off
      with him already and there would never be anything more. What had happened
      was over; it had nothing to do with any one, and if Laevsky found it out
      he would not believe in it.
    

      There was only one bathing-house for ladies on the sea-front; men bathed
      under the open sky. Going into the bathing-house, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna
      found there an elderly lady, Marya Konstantinovna Bityugov, and her
      daughter Katya, a schoolgirl of fifteen; both of them were sitting on a
      bench undressing. Marya Konstantinovna was a good-natured, enthusiastic,
      and genteel person, who talked in a drawling and pathetic voice. She had
      been a governess until she was thirty-two, and then had married Bityugov,
      a Government official—a bald little man with his hair combed on to
      his temples and with a very meek disposition. She was still in love with
      him, was jealous, blushed at the word “love,” and told every
      one she was very happy.
    

      “My dear,” she cried enthusiastically, on seeing Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, assuming an expression which all her acquaintances called
      “almond-oily.” “My dear, how delightful that you have
      come! We’ll bathe together —that’s enchanting!”
    

      Olga quickly flung off her dress and chemise, and began undressing her
      mistress.
    

      “It’s not quite so hot to-day as yesterday?” said
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, shrinking at the coarse touch of the naked cook.
      “Yesterday I almost died of the heat.”
    

      “Oh, yes, my dear; I could hardly breathe myself. Would you believe
      it? I bathed yesterday three times! Just imagine, my dear, three times!
      Nikodim Alexandritch was quite uneasy.”
    

      “Is it possible to be so ugly?” thought Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      looking at Olga and the official’s wife; she glanced at Katya and
      thought: “The little girl’s not badly made.”
    

      “Your Nikodim Alexandritch is very charming!” she said.
      “I’m simply in love with him.”
    

      “Ha, ha, ha!” cried Marya Konstantinovna, with a forced laugh;
      “that’s quite enchanting.”
    

      Free from her clothes, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna felt a desire to fly. And it
      seemed to her that if she were to wave her hands she would fly upwards.
      When she was undressed, she noticed that Olga looked scornfully at her
      white body. Olga, a young soldier’s wife, was living with her lawful
      husband, and so considered herself superior to her mistress. Marya
      Konstantinovna and Katya were afraid of her, and did not respect her. This
      was disagreeable, and to raise herself in their opinion, Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna said:
    

      “At home, in Petersburg, summer villa life is at its height now. My
      husband and I have so many friends! We ought to go and see them.”
    

      “I believe your husband is an engineer?” said Marya
      Konstantinovna timidly.
    

      “I am speaking of Laevsky. He has a great many acquaintances. But
      unfortunately his mother is a proud aristocrat, not very intelligent. . .
      .”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna threw herself into the water without finishing; Marya
      Konstantinovna and Katya made their way in after her.
    

      “There are so many conventional ideas in the world,” Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna went on, “and life is not so easy as it seems.”
    

      Marya Konstantinovna, who had been a governess in aristocratic families
      and who was an authority on social matters, said:
    

      “Oh yes! Would you believe me, my dear, at the Garatynskys’ I
      was expected to dress for lunch as well as for dinner, so that, like an
      actress, I received a special allowance for my wardrobe in addition to my
      salary.”
    

      She stood between Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and Katya as though to screen her
      daughter from the water that washed the former.
    

      Through the open doors looking out to the sea they could see some one
      swimming a hundred paces from their bathing-place.
    

      “Mother, it’s our Kostya,” said Katya.
    

      “Ach, ach!” Marya Konstantinovna cackled in her dismay.
      “Ach, Kostya!” she shouted, “Come back! Kostya, come
      back!”
    

      Kostya, a boy of fourteen, to show off his prowess before his mother and
      sister, dived and swam farther, but began to be exhausted and hurried
      back, and from his strained and serious face it could be seen that he
      could not trust his own strength.
    

      “The trouble one has with these boys, my dear!” said Marya
      Konstantinovna, growing calmer. “Before you can turn round, he will
      break his neck. Ah, my dear, how sweet it is, and yet at the same time how
      difficult, to be a mother! One’s afraid of everything.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna put on her straw hat and dashed out into the open
      sea. She swam some thirty feet and then turned on her back. She could see
      the sea to the horizon, the steamers, the people on the sea-front, the
      town; and all this, together with the sultry heat and the soft,
      transparent waves, excited her and whispered that she must live, live. . .
      . A sailing-boat darted by her rapidly and vigorously, cleaving the waves
      and the air; the man sitting at the helm looked at her, and she liked
      being looked at. . . .
    

      After bathing, the ladies dressed and went away together.
    

      “I have fever every alternate day, and yet I don’t get thin,”
      said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, licking her lips, which were salt from the
      bathe, and responding with a smile to the bows of her acquaintances.
      “I’ve always been plump, and now I believe I’m plumper
      than ever.”
    

      “That, my dear, is constitutional. If, like me, one has no
      constitutional tendency to stoutness, no diet is of any use. . . . But you’ve
      wetted your hat, my dear.”
    

      “It doesn’t matter; it will dry.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna saw again the men in white who were walking on the
      sea-front and talking French; and again she felt a sudden thrill of joy,
      and had a vague memory of some big hall in which she had once danced, or
      of which, perhaps, she had once dreamed. And something at the bottom of
      her soul dimly and obscurely whispered to her that she was a pretty,
      common, miserable, worthless woman. . . .
    

      Marya Konstantinovna stopped at her gate and asked her to come in and sit
      down for a little while.
    

      “Come in, my dear,” she said in an imploring voice, and at the
      same time she looked at Nadyezhda Fyodorovna with anxiety and hope;
      perhaps she would refuse and not come in!
    

      “With pleasure,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, accepting. “You
      know how I love being with you!”
    

      And she went into the house. Marya Konstantinovna sat her down and gave
      her coffee, regaled her with milk rolls, then showed her photographs of
      her former pupils, the Garatynskys, who were by now married. She showed
      her, too, the examination reports of Kostya and Katya. The reports were
      very good, but to make them seem even better, she complained, with a sigh,
      how difficult the lessons at school were now. . . . She made much of her
      visitor, and was sorry for her, though at the same time she was harassed
      by the thought that Nadyezhda Fyodorovna might have a corrupting influence
      on the morals of Kostya and Katya, and was glad that her Nikodim
      Alexandritch was not at home. Seeing that in her opinion all men are fond
      of “women like that,” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna might have a bad
      effect on Nikodim Alexandritch too.
    

      As she talked to her visitor, Marya Konstantinovna kept remembering that
      they were to have a picnic that evening, and that Von Koren had
      particularly begged her to say nothing about it to the “Japanese
      monkeys”—that is, Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna; but she
      dropped a word about it unawares, crimsoned, and said in confusion:
    

      “I hope you will come too!”
    

      VI
    

      It was agreed to drive about five miles out of town on the road to the
      south, to stop near a duhan at the junction of two streams —the
      Black River and the Yellow River—and to cook fish soup. They started
      out soon after five. Foremost of the party in a char-Ã -banc drove
      Samoylenko and Laevsky; they were followed by Marya Konstantinovna,
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, Katya and Kostya, in a coach with three horses,
      carrying with them the crockery and a basket with provisions. In the next
      carriage came the police captain, Kirilin, and the young Atchmianov, the
      son of the shopkeeper to whom Nadyezhda Fyodorovna owed three hundred
      roubles; opposite them, huddled up on the little seat with his feet tucked
      under him, sat Nikodim Alexandritch, a neat little man with hair combed on
      to his temples. Last of all came Von Koren and the deacon; at the deacon’s
      feet stood a basket of fish.
    

      “R-r-right!” Samoylenko shouted at the top of his voice when
      he met a cart or a mountaineer riding on a donkey.
    

      “In two years’ time, when I shall have the means and the
      people ready, I shall set off on an expedition,” Von Koren was
      telling the deacon. “I shall go by the sea-coast from Vladivostok to
      the Behring Straits, and then from the Straits to the mouth of the
      Yenisei. We shall make the map, study the fauna and the flora, and make
      detailed geological, anthropological, and ethnographical researches. It
      depends upon you to go with me or not.”
    

      “It’s impossible,” said the deacon.
    

      “Why?”
    

      “I’m a man with ties and a family.”
    

      “Your wife will let you go; we will provide for her. Better still if
      you were to persuade her for the public benefit to go into a nunnery; that
      would make it possible for you to become a monk, too, and join the
      expedition as a priest. I can arrange it for you.”
    

      The deacon was silent.
    

      “Do you know your theology well?” asked the zoologist.
    

      “No, rather badly.”
    

      “H’m! . . . I can’t give you any advice on that score,
      because I don’t know much about theology myself. You give me a list
      of books you need, and I will send them to you from Petersburg in the
      winter. It will be necessary for you to read the notes of religious
      travellers, too; among them are some good ethnologists and Oriental
      scholars. When you are familiar with their methods, it will be easier for
      you to set to work. And you needn’t waste your time till you get the
      books; come to me, and we will study the compass and go through a course
      of meteorology. All that’s indispensable.”
    

      “To be sure . . .” muttered the deacon, and he laughed.
      “I was trying to get a place in Central Russia, and my uncle, the
      head priest, promised to help me. If I go with you I shall have troubled
      them for nothing.”
    

      “I don’t understand your hesitation. If you go on being an
      ordinary deacon, who is only obliged to hold a service on holidays, and on
      the other days can rest from work, you will be exactly the same as you are
      now in ten years’ time, and will have gained nothing but a beard and
      moustache; while on returning from this expedition in ten years’
      time you will be a different man, you will be enriched by the
      consciousness that something has been done by you.”
    

      From the ladies’ carriage came shrieks of terror and delight. The
      carriages were driving along a road hollowed in a literally overhanging
      precipitous cliff, and it seemed to every one that they were galloping
      along a shelf on a steep wall, and that in a moment the carriages would
      drop into the abyss. On the right stretched the sea; on the left was a
      rough brown wall with black blotches and red veins and with climbing
      roots; while on the summit stood shaggy fir-trees bent over, as though
      looking down in terror and curiosity. A minute later there were shrieks
      and laughter again: they had to drive under a huge overhanging rock.
    

      “I don’t know why the devil I’m coming with you,”
      said Laevsky. “How stupid and vulgar it is! I want to go to the
      North, to run away, to escape; but here I am, for some reason, going to
      this stupid picnic.”
    

      “But look, what a view!” said Samoylenko as the horses turned
      to the left, and the valley of the Yellow River came into sight and the
      stream itself gleamed in the sunlight, yellow, turbid, frantic.
    

      “I see nothing fine in that, Sasha,” answered Laevsky. “To
      be in continual ecstasies over nature shows poverty of imagination. In
      comparison with what my imagination can give me, all these streams and
      rocks are trash, and nothing else.”
    

      The carriages now were by the banks of the stream. The high mountain banks
      gradually grew closer, the valley shrank together and ended in a gorge;
      the rocky mountain round which they were driving had been piled together
      by nature out of huge rocks, pressing upon each other with such terrible
      weight, that Samoylenko could not help gasping every time he looked at
      them. The dark and beautiful mountain was cleft in places by narrow
      fissures and gorges from which came a breath of dewy moisture and mystery;
      through the gorges could be seen other mountains, brown, pink, lilac,
      smoky, or bathed in vivid sunlight. From time to time as they passed a
      gorge they caught the sound of water falling from the heights and
      splashing on the stones.
    

      “Ach, the damned mountains!” sighed Laevsky. “How sick I
      am of them!”
    

      At the place where the Black River falls into the Yellow, and the water
      black as ink stains the yellow and struggles with it, stood the Tatar
      Kerbalay’s duhan, with the Russian flag on the roof and with
      an inscription written in chalk: “The Pleasant duhan.”
      Near it was a little garden, enclosed in a hurdle fence, with tables and
      chairs set out in it, and in the midst of a thicket of wretched
      thornbushes stood a single solitary cypress, dark and beautiful.
    

      Kerbalay, a nimble little Tatar in a blue shirt and a white apron, was
      standing in the road, and, holding his stomach, he bowed low to welcome
      the carriages, and smiled, showing his glistening white teeth.
    

      “Good-evening, Kerbalay,” shouted Samoylenko. “We are
      driving on a little further, and you take along the samovar and chairs!
      Look sharp!”
    

      Kerbalay nodded his shaven head and muttered something, and only those
      sitting in the last carriage could hear: “We’ve got trout,
      your Excellency.”
    

      “Bring them, bring them!” said Von Koren.
    

      Five hundred paces from the duhan the carriages stopped. Samoylenko
      selected a small meadow round which there were scattered stones convenient
      for sitting on, and a fallen tree blown down by the storm with roots
      overgrown by moss and dry yellow needles. Here there was a fragile wooden
      bridge over the stream, and just opposite on the other bank there was a
      little barn for drying maize, standing on four low piles, and looking like
      the hut on hen’s legs in the fairy tale; a little ladder sloped from
      its door.
    

      The first impression in all was a feeling that they would never get out of
      that place again. On all sides wherever they looked, the mountains rose up
      and towered above them, and the shadows of evening were stealing rapidly,
      rapidly from the duhan and dark cypress, making the narrow winding
      valley of the Black River narrower and the mountains higher. They could
      hear the river murmuring and the unceasing chirrup of the grasshoppers.
    

      “Enchanting!” said Marya Konstantinovna, heaving deep sighs of
      ecstasy. “Children, look how fine! What peace!”
    

      “Yes, it really is fine,” assented Laevsky, who liked the
      view, and for some reason felt sad as he looked at the sky and then at the
      blue smoke rising from the chimney of the duhan. “Yes, it is
      fine,” he repeated.
    

      “Ivan Andreitch, describe this view,” Marya Konstantinovna
      said tearfully.
    

      “Why?” asked Laevsky. “The impression is better than any
      description. The wealth of sights and sounds which every one receives from
      nature by direct impression is ranted about by authors in a hideous and
      unrecognisable way.”
    

      “Really?” Von Koren asked coldly, choosing the biggest stone
      by the side of the water, and trying to clamber up and sit upon it.
      “Really?” he repeated, looking directly at Laevsky. “What
      of ‘Romeo and Juliet’? Or, for instance, Pushkin’s
      ‘Night in the Ukraine’? Nature ought to come and bow down at
      their feet.”
    

      “Perhaps,” said Laevsky, who was too lazy to think and oppose
      him. “Though what is ‘Romeo and Juliet’ after all?”
      he added after a short pause. “The beauty of poetry and holiness of
      love are simply the roses under which they try to hide its rottenness.
      Romeo is just the same sort of animal as all the rest of us.”
    

      “Whatever one talks to you about, you always bring it round to . . .”
      Von Koren glanced round at Katya and broke off.
    

      “What do I bring it round to?” asked Laevsky.
    

      “One tells you, for instance, how beautiful a bunch of grapes is,
      and you answer: ‘Yes, but how ugly it is when it is chewed and
      digested in one’s stomach!’ Why say that? It’s not new,
      and . . . altogether it is a queer habit.”
    

      Laevsky knew that Von Koren did not like him, and so was afraid of him,
      and felt in his presence as though every one were constrained and some one
      were standing behind his back. He made no answer and walked away, feeling
      sorry he had come.
    

      “Gentlemen, quick march for brushwood for the fire!” commanded
      Samoylenko.
    

      They all wandered off in different directions, and no one was left but
      Kirilin, Atchmianov, and Nikodim Alexandritch. Kerbalay brought chairs,
      spread a rug on the ground, and set a few bottles of wine.
    

      The police captain, Kirilin, a tall, good-looking man, who in all weathers
      wore his great-coat over his tunic, with his haughty deportment, stately
      carriage, and thick, rather hoarse voice, looked like a young provincial
      chief of police; his expression was mournful and sleepy, as though he had
      just been waked against his will.
    

      “What have you brought this for, you brute?” he asked
      Kerbalay, deliberately articulating each word. “I ordered you to
      give us kvarel, and what have you brought, you ugly Tatar? Eh?
      What?”
    

      “We have plenty of wine of our own, Yegor Alekseitch,” Nikodim
      Alexandritch observed, timidly and politely.
    

      “What? But I want us to have my wine, too; I’m taking part in
      the picnic and I imagine I have full right to contribute my share. I
      im-ma-gine so! Bring ten bottles of kvarel.”
    

      “Why so many?” asked Nikodim Alexandritch, in wonder, knowing
      Kirilin had no money.
    

      “Twenty bottles! Thirty!” shouted Kirilin.
    

      “Never mind, let him,” Atchmianov whispered to Nikodim
      Alexandritch; “I’ll pay.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was in a light-hearted, mischievous mood; she wanted
      to skip and jump, to laugh, to shout, to tease, to flirt. In her cheap
      cotton dress with blue pansies on it, in her red shoes and the same straw
      hat, she seemed to herself, little, simple, light, ethereal as a
      butterfly. She ran over the rickety bridge and looked for a minute into
      the water, in order to feel giddy; then, shrieking and laughing, ran to
      the other side to the drying-shed, and she fancied that all the men were
      admiring her, even Kerbalay. When in the rapidly falling darkness the
      trees began to melt into the mountains and the horses into the carriages,
      and a light gleamed in the windows of the duhan, she climbed up the
      mountain by the little path which zigzagged between stones and
      thorn-bushes and sat on a stone. Down below, the camp-fire was burning.
      Near the fire, with his sleeves tucked up, the deacon was moving to and
      fro, and his long black shadow kept describing a circle round it; he put
      on wood, and with a spoon tied to a long stick he stirred the cauldron.
      Samoylenko, with a copper-red face, was fussing round the fire just as
      though he were in his own kitchen, shouting furiously:
    

      “Where’s the salt, gentlemen? I bet you’ve forgotten it.
      Why are you all sitting about like lords while I do the work?”
    

      Laevsky and Nikodim Alexandritch were sitting side by side on the fallen
      tree looking pensively at the fire. Marya Konstantinovna, Katya, and
      Kostya were taking the cups, saucers, and plates out of the baskets. Von
      Koren, with his arms folded and one foot on a stone, was standing on a
      bank at the very edge of the water, thinking about something. Patches of
      red light from the fire moved together with the shadows over the ground
      near the dark human figures, and quivered on the mountain, on the trees,
      on the bridge, on the drying-shed; on the other side the steep,
      scooped-out bank was all lighted up and glimmering in the stream, and the
      rushing turbid water broke its reflection into little bits.
    

      The deacon went for the fish which Kerbalay was cleaning and washing on
      the bank, but he stood still half-way and looked about him.
    

      “My God, how nice it is!” he thought. “People, rocks,
      the fire, the twilight, a monstrous tree—nothing more, and yet how
      fine it is!”
    

      On the further bank some unknown persons made their appearance near the
      drying-shed. The flickering light and the smoke from the camp-fire puffing
      in that direction made it impossible to get a full view of them all at
      once, but glimpses were caught now of a shaggy hat and a grey beard, now
      of a blue shirt, now of a figure, ragged from shoulder to knee, with a
      dagger across the body; then a swarthy young face with black eyebrows, as
      thick and bold as though they had been drawn in charcoal. Five of them sat
      in a circle on the ground, and the other five went into the drying-shed.
      One was standing at the door with his back to the fire, and with his hands
      behind his back was telling something, which must have been very
      interesting, for when Samoylenko threw on twigs and the fire flared up,
      and scattered sparks and threw a glaring light on the shed, two calm
      countenances with an expression on them of deep attention could be seen,
      looking out of the door, while those who were sitting in a circle turned
      round and began listening to the speaker. Soon after, those sitting in a
      circle began softly singing something slow and melodious, that sounded
      like Lenten Church music. . . . Listening to them, the deacon imagined how
      it would be with him in ten years’ time, when he would come back
      from the expedition: he would be a young priest and monk, an author with a
      name and a splendid past; he would be consecrated an archimandrite, then a
      bishop; and he would serve mass in the cathedral; in a golden mitre he
      would come out into the body of the church with the ikon on his breast,
      and blessing the mass of the people with the triple and the double
      candelabra, would proclaim: “Look down from Heaven, O God, behold
      and visit this vineyard which Thy Hand has planted,” and the
      children with their angel voices would sing in response: “Holy God.
      . .”
    

      “Deacon, where is that fish?” he heard Samoylenko’s
      voice.
    

      As he went back to the fire, the deacon imagined the Church procession
      going along a dusty road on a hot July day; in front the peasants carrying
      the banners and the women and children the ikons, then the boy choristers
      and the sacristan with his face tied up and a straw in his hair, then in
      due order himself, the deacon, and behind him the priest wearing his calotte
      and carrying a cross, and behind them, tramping in the dust, a crowd of
      peasants—men, women, and children; in the crowd his wife and the
      priest’s wife with kerchiefs on their heads. The choristers sing,
      the babies cry, the corncrakes call, the lark carols. . . . Then they make
      a stand and sprinkle the herd with holy water. . . . They go on again, and
      then kneeling pray for rain. Then lunch and talk. . . .
    

      “And that’s nice too . . .” thought the deacon.
    

      VII
    

      Kirilin and Atchmianov climbed up the mountain by the path. Atchmianov
      dropped behind and stopped, while Kirilin went up to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna.
    

      “Good-evening,” he said, touching his cap.
    

      “Good-evening.”
    

      “Yes!” said Kirilin, looking at the sky and pondering.
    

      “Why ‘yes’?” asked Nadyezhda Fyodorovna after a
      brief pause, noticing that Atchmianov was watching them both.
    

      “And so it seems,” said the officer, slowly, “that our
      love has withered before it has blossomed, so to speak. How do you wish me
      to understand it? Is it a sort of coquetry on your part, or do you look
      upon me as a nincompoop who can be treated as you choose.”
    

      “It was a mistake! Leave me alone!” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna said
      sharply, on that beautiful, marvellous evening, looking at him with terror
      and asking herself with bewilderment, could there really have been a
      moment when that man attracted her and had been near to her?
    

      “So that’s it!” said Kirilin; he thought in silence for
      a few minutes and said: “Well, I’ll wait till you are in a
      better humour, and meanwhile I venture to assure you I am a gentleman, and
      I don’t allow any one to doubt it. Adieu!”
    

      He touched his cap again and walked off, making his way between the
      bushes. After a short interval Atchmianov approached hesitatingly.
    

      “What a fine evening!” he said with a slight Armenian accent.
    

      He was nice-looking, fashionably dressed, and behaved unaffectedly like a
      well-bred youth, but Nadyezhda Fyodorovna did not like him because she
      owed his father three hundred roubles; it was displeasing to her, too,
      that a shopkeeper had been asked to the picnic, and she was vexed at his
      coming up to her that evening when her heart felt so pure.
    

      “The picnic is a success altogether,” he said, after a pause.
    

      “Yes,” she agreed, and as though suddenly remembering her
      debt, she said carelessly: “Oh, tell them in your shop that Ivan
      Andreitch will come round in a day or two and will pay three hundred
      roubles . . . . I don’t remember exactly what it is.”
    

      “I would give another three hundred if you would not mention that
      debt every day. Why be prosaic?”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna laughed; the amusing idea occurred to her that if she
      had been willing and sufficiently immoral she might in one minute be free
      from her debt. If she, for instance, were to turn the head of this
      handsome young fool! How amusing, absurd, wild it would be really! And she
      suddenly felt a longing to make him love her, to plunder him, throw him
      over, and then to see what would come of it.
    

      “Allow me to give you one piece of advice,” Atchmianov said
      timidly. “I beg you to beware of Kirilin. He says horrible things
      about you everywhere.”
    

      “It doesn’t interest me to know what every fool says of me,”
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna said coldly, and the amusing thought of playing with
      handsome young Atchmianov suddenly lost its charm.
    

      “We must go down,” she said; “they’re calling us.”
    

      The fish soup was ready by now. They were ladling it out by platefuls, and
      eating it with the religious solemnity with which this is only done at a
      picnic; and every one thought the fish soup very good, and thought that at
      home they had never eaten anything so nice. As is always the case at
      picnics, in the mass of dinner napkins, parcels, useless greasy papers
      fluttering in the wind, no one knew where was his glass or where his
      bread. They poured the wine on the carpet and on their own knees, spilt
      the salt, while it was dark all round them and the fire burnt more dimly,
      and every one was too lazy to get up and put wood on. They all drank wine,
      and even gave Kostya and Katya half a glass each. Nadyezhda Fyodorovna
      drank one glass and then another, got a little drunk and forgot about
      Kirilin.
    

      “A splendid picnic, an enchanting evening,” said Laevsky,
      growing lively with the wine. “But I should prefer a fine winter to
      all this. ‘His beaver collar is silver with hoar-frost.’”
    

      “Every one to his taste,” observed Von Koren.
    

      Laevsky felt uncomfortable; the heat of the campfire was beating upon his
      back, and the hatred of Von Koren upon his breast and face: this hatred on
      the part of a decent, clever man, a feeling in which there probably lay
      hid a well-grounded reason, humiliated him and enervated him, and unable
      to stand up against it, he said in a propitiatory tone:
    

      “I am passionately fond of nature, and I regret that I’m not a
      naturalist. I envy you.”
    

      “Well, I don’t envy you, and don’t regret it,”
      said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. “I don’t understand how any one can
      seriously interest himself in beetles and ladybirds while the people are
      suffering.”
    

      Laevsky shared her opinion. He was absolutely ignorant of natural science,
      and so could never reconcile himself to the authoritative tone and the
      learned and profound air of the people who devoted themselves to the
      whiskers of ants and the claws of beetles, and he always felt vexed that
      these people, relying on these whiskers, claws, and something they called
      protoplasm (he always imagined it in the form of an oyster), should
      undertake to decide questions involving the origin and life of man. But in
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s words he heard a note of falsity, and simply
      to contradict her he said: “The point is not the ladybirds, but the
      deductions made from them.”
    

      VIII
    

      It was late, eleven o’clock, when they began to get into the
      carriages to go home. They took their seats, and the only ones missing
      were Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and Atchmianov, who were running after one
      another, laughing, the other side of the stream.
    

      “Make haste, my friends,” shouted Samoylenko.
    

      “You oughtn’t to give ladies wine,” said Von Koren in a
      low voice.
    

      Laevsky, exhausted by the picnic, by the hatred of Von Koren, and by his
      own thoughts, went to meet Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and when, gay and happy,
      feeling light as a feather, breathless and laughing, she took him by both
      hands and laid her head on his breast, he stepped back and said dryly:
    

      “You are behaving like a . . . cocotte.”
    

      It sounded horribly coarse, so that he felt sorry for her at once. On his
      angry, exhausted face she read hatred, pity and vexation with himself, and
      her heart sank at once. She realised instantly that she had gone too far,
      had been too free and easy in her behaviour, and overcome with misery,
      feeling herself heavy, stout, coarse, and drunk, she got into the first
      empty carriage together with Atchmianov. Laevsky got in with Kirilin, the
      zoologist with Samoylenko, the deacon with the ladies, and the party set
      off.
    

      “You see what the Japanese monkeys are like,” Von Koren began,
      rolling himself up in his cloak and shutting his eyes. “You heard
      she doesn’t care to take an interest in beetles and ladybirds
      because the people are suffering. That’s how all the Japanese
      monkeys look upon people like us. They’re a slavish, cunning race,
      terrified by the whip and the fist for ten generations; they tremble and
      burn incense only before violence; but let the monkey into a free state
      where there’s no one to take it by the collar, and it relaxes at
      once and shows itself in its true colours. Look how bold they are in
      picture galleries, in museums, in theatres, or when they talk of science:
      they puff themselves out and get excited, they are abusive and critical .
      . . they are bound to criticise—it’s the sign of the slave.
      You listen: men of the liberal professions are more often sworn at than
      pickpockets—that’s because three-quarters of society are made
      up of slaves, of just such monkeys. It never happens that a slave holds
      out his hand to you and sincerely says ‘Thank you’ to you for
      your work.”
    

      “I don’t know what you want,” said Samoylenko, yawning;
      “the poor thing, in the simplicity of her heart, wanted to talk to
      you of scientific subjects, and you draw a conclusion from that. You’re
      cross with him for something or other, and with her, too, to keep him
      company. She’s a splendid woman.”
    

      “Ah, nonsense! An ordinary kept woman, depraved and vulgar. Listen,
      Alexandr Daviditch; when you meet a simple peasant woman, who isn’t
      living with her husband, who does nothing but giggle, you tell her to go
      and work. Why are you timid in this case and afraid to tell the truth?
      Simply because Nadyezhda Fyodorovna is kept, not by a sailor, but by an
      official.”
    

      “What am I to do with her?” said Samoylenko, getting angry.
      “Beat her or what?
    

      “Not flatter vice. We curse vice only behind its back, and that’s
      like making a long nose at it round a corner. I am a zoologist or a
      sociologist, which is the same thing; you are a doctor; society believes
      in us; we ought to point out the terrible harm which threatens it and the
      next generation from the existence of ladies like Nadyezhda Ivanovna.”
    

      “Fyodorovna,” Samoylenko corrected. “But what ought
      society to do?”
    

      “Society? That’s its affair. To my thinking the surest and
      most direct method is—compulsion. Manu militari she ought to
      be returned to her husband; and if her husband won’t take her in,
      then she ought to be sent to penal servitude or some house of correction.”
    

      “Ouf!” sighed Samoylenko. He paused and asked quietly: “You
      said the other day that people like Laevsky ought to be destroyed. . . .
      Tell me, if you . . . if the State or society commissioned you to destroy
      him, could you . . . bring yourself to it?”
    

      “My hand would not tremble.”
    

      IX
    

      When they got home, Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna went into their dark,
      stuffy, dull rooms. Both were silent. Laevsky lighted a candle, while
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna sat down, and without taking off her cloak and hat,
      lifted her melancholy, guilty eyes to him.
    

      He knew that she expected an explanation from him, but an explanation
      would be wearisome, useless and exhausting, and his heart was heavy
      because he had lost control over himself and been rude to her. He chanced
      to feel in his pocket the letter which he had been intending every day to
      read to her, and thought if he were to show her that letter now, it would
      turn her thoughts in another direction.
    

      “It is time to define our relations,” he thought. “I
      will give it her; what is to be will be.”
    

      He took out the letter and gave it her.
    

      “Read it. It concerns you.”
    

      Saying this, he went into his own room and lay down on the sofa in the
      dark without a pillow. Nadyezhda Fyodorovna read the letter, and it seemed
      to her as though the ceiling were falling and the walls were closing in on
      her. It seemed suddenly dark and shut in and terrible. She crossed herself
      quickly three times and said:
    

      “Give him peace, O Lord . . . give him peace. . . .”
    

      And she began crying.
    

      “Vanya,” she called. “Ivan Andreitch!”
    

      There was no answer. Thinking that Laevsky had come in and was standing
      behind her chair, she sobbed like a child, and said:
    

      “Why did you not tell me before that he was dead? I wouldn’t
      have gone to the picnic; I shouldn’t have laughed so horribly. . . .
      The men said horrid things to me. What a sin, what a sin! Save me, Vanya,
      save me. . . . I have been mad. . . . I am lost. . . .”
    

      Laevsky heard her sobs. He felt stifled and his heart was beating
      violently. In his misery he got up, stood in the middle of the room,
      groped his way in the dark to an easy-chair by the table, and sat down.
    

      “This is a prison . . .” he thought. “I must get away .
      . . I can’t bear it.”
    

      It was too late to go and play cards; there were no restaurants in the
      town. He lay down again and covered his ears that he might not hear her
      sobbing, and he suddenly remembered that he could go to Samoylenko. To
      avoid going near Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, he got out of the window into the
      garden, climbed over the garden fence and went along the street. It was
      dark. A steamer, judging by its lights, a big passenger one, had just come
      in. He heard the clank of the anchor chain. A red light was moving rapidly
      from the shore in the direction of the steamer: it was the Customs boat
      going out to it.
    

      “The passengers are asleep in their cabins . . .” thought
      Laevsky, and he envied the peace of mind of other people.
    

      The windows in Samoylenko’s house were open. Laevsky looked in at
      one of them, then in at another; it was dark and still in the rooms.
    

      “Alexandr Daviditch, are you asleep?” he called. “Alexandr
      Daviditch!”
    

      He heard a cough and an uneasy shout:
    

      “Who’s there? What the devil?”
    

      “It is I, Alexandr Daviditch; excuse me.”
    

      A little later the door opened; there was a glow of soft light from the
      lamp, and Samoylenko’s huge figure appeared all in white, with a
      white nightcap on his head.
    

      “What now?” he asked, scratching himself and breathing hard
      from sleepiness. “Wait a minute; I’ll open the door directly.”
    

      “Don’t trouble; I’ll get in at the window. . . .”
    

      Laevsky climbed in at the window, and when he reached Samoylenko, seized
      him by the hand.
    

      “Alexandr Daviditch,” he said in a shaking voice, “save
      me! I beseech you, I implore you. Understand me! My position is agonising.
      If it goes on for another two days I shall strangle myself like . . . like
      a dog.”
    

      “Wait a bit. . . . What are you talking about exactly?”
    

      “Light a candle.”
    

      “Oh . . . oh! . . .” sighed Samoylenko, lighting a candle.
      “My God! My God! . . . Why, it’s past one, brother.”
    

      “Excuse me, but I can’t stay at home,” said Laevsky,
      feeling great comfort from the light and the presence of Samoylenko.
      “You are my best, my only friend, Alexandr Daviditch. . . . You are
      my only hope. For God’s sake, come to my rescue, whether you want to
      or not. I must get away from here, come what may! . . . Lend me the money!”
    

      “Oh, my God, my God! . . .” sighed Samoylenko, scratching
      himself. “I was dropping asleep and I hear the whistle of the
      steamer, and now you . . . Do you want much?”
    

      “Three hundred roubles at least. I must leave her a hundred, and I
      need two hundred for the journey. . . . I owe you about four hundred
      already, but I will send it you all . . . all. . . .”
    

      Samoylenko took hold of both his whiskers in one hand, and standing with
      his legs wide apart, pondered.
    

      “Yes . . .” he muttered, musing. “Three hundred. . . .
      Yes. . . . But I haven’t got so much. I shall have to borrow it from
      some one.”
    

      “Borrow it, for God’s sake!” said Laevsky, seeing from
      Samoylenko’s face that he wanted to lend him the money and certainly
      would lend it. “Borrow it, and I’ll be sure to pay you back. I
      will send it from Petersburg as soon as I get there. You can set your mind
      at rest about that. I’ll tell you what, Sasha,” he said,
      growing more animated; “let us have some wine.”
    

      “Yes . . . we can have some wine, too.”
    

      They both went into the dining-room.
    

      “And how about Nadyezhda Fyodorovna?” asked Samoylenko,
      setting three bottles and a plate of peaches on the table. “Surely
      she’s not remaining?”
    

      “I will arrange it all, I will arrange it all,” said Laevsky,
      feeling an unexpected rush of joy. “I will send her the money
      afterwards and she will join me. . . . Then we will define our relations.
      To your health, friend.”
    

      “Wait a bit,” said Samoylenko. “Drink this first. . . .
      This is from my vineyard. This bottle is from Navaridze’s vineyard
      and this one is from Ahatulov’s. . . . Try all three kinds and tell
      me candidly. . . . There seems a little acidity about mine. Eh? Don’t
      you taste it?”
    

      “Yes. You have comforted me, Alexandr Daviditch. Thank you. . . . I
      feel better.”
    

      “Is there any acidity?”
    

      “Goodness only knows, I don’t know. But you are a splendid,
      wonderful man!”
    

      Looking at his pale, excited, good-natured face, Samoylenko remembered Von
      Koren’s view that men like that ought to be destroyed, and Laevsky
      seemed to him a weak, defenceless child, whom any one could injure and
      destroy.
    

      “And when you go, make it up with your mother,” he said.
      “It’s not right.”
    

      “Yes, yes; I certainly shall.”
    

      They were silent for a while. When they had emptied the first bottle,
      Samoylenko said:
    

      “You ought to make it up with Von Koren too. You are both such
      splendid, clever fellows, and you glare at each other like wolves.”
    

      “Yes, he’s a fine, very intelligent fellow,” Laevsky
      assented, ready now to praise and forgive every one. “He’s a
      remarkable man, but it’s impossible for me to get on with him. No!
      Our natures are too different. I’m an indolent, weak, submissive
      nature. Perhaps in a good minute I might hold out my hand to him, but he
      would turn away from me . . . with contempt.”
    

      Laevsky took a sip of wine, walked from corner to corner and went on,
      standing in the middle of the room:
    

      “I understand Von Koren very well. His is a resolute, strong,
      despotic nature. You have heard him continually talking of ‘the
      expedition,’ and it’s not mere talk. He wants the wilderness,
      the moonlit night: all around in little tents, under the open sky, lie
      sleeping his sick and hungry Cossacks, guides, porters, doctor, priest,
      all exhausted with their weary marches, while only he is awake, sitting
      like Stanley on a camp-stool, feeling himself the monarch of the desert
      and the master of these men. He goes on and on and on, his men groan and
      die, one after another, and he goes on and on, and in the end perishes
      himself, but still is monarch and ruler of the desert, since the cross
      upon his tomb can be seen by the caravans for thirty or forty miles over
      the desert. I am sorry the man is not in the army. He would have made a
      splendid military genius. He would not have hesitated to drown his cavalry
      in the river and make a bridge out of dead bodies. And such hardihood is
      more needed in war than any kind of fortification or strategy. Oh, I
      understand him perfectly! Tell me: why is he wasting his substance here?
      What does he want here?”
    

      “He is studying the marine fauna.”
    

      “No, no, brother, no!” Laevsky sighed. “A scientific man
      who was on the steamer told me the Black Sea was poor in animal life, and
      that in its depths, thanks to the abundance of sulphuric hydrogen, organic
      life was impossible. All the serious zoologists work at the biological
      station at Naples or Villefranche. But Von Koren is independent and
      obstinate: he works on the Black Sea because nobody else is working there;
      he is at loggerheads with the university, does not care to know his
      comrades and other scientific men because he is first of all a despot and
      only secondly a zoologist. And you’ll see he’ll do something.
      He is already dreaming that when he comes back from his expedition he will
      purify our universities from intrigue and mediocrity, and will make the
      scientific men mind their p’s and q’s. Despotism is just as
      strong in science as in the army. And he is spending his second summer in
      this stinking little town because he would rather be first in a village
      than second in a town. Here he is a king and an eagle; he keeps all the
      inhabitants under his thumb and oppresses them with his authority. He has
      appropriated every one, he meddles in other people’s affairs;
      everything is of use to him, and every one is afraid of him. I am slipping
      out of his clutches, he feels that and hates me. Hasn’t he told you
      that I ought to be destroyed or sent to hard labour?”
    

      “Yes,” laughed Samoylenko.
    

      Laevsky laughed too, and drank some wine.
    

      “His ideals are despotic too,” he said, laughing, and biting a
      peach. “Ordinary mortals think of their neighbour—me, you, man
      in fact—if they work for the common weal. To Von Koren men are
      puppets and nonentities, too trivial to be the object of his life. He
      works, will go for his expedition and break his neck there, not for the
      sake of love for his neighbour, but for the sake of such abstractions as
      humanity, future generations, an ideal race of men. He exerts himself for
      the improvement of the human race, and we are in his eyes only slaves,
      food for the cannon, beasts of burden; some he would destroy or stow away
      in Siberia, others he would break by discipline, would, like Araktcheev,
      force them to get up and go to bed to the sound of the drum; would appoint
      eunuchs to preserve our chastity and morality, would order them to fire at
      any one who steps out of the circle of our narrow conservative morality;
      and all this in the name of the improvement of the human race. . . . And
      what is the human race? Illusion, mirage . . . despots have always been
      illusionists. I understand him very well, brother. I appreciate him and
      don’t deny his importance; this world rests on men like him, and if
      the world were left only to such men as us, for all our good-nature and
      good intentions, we should make as great a mess of it as the flies have of
      that picture. Yes.”
    

      Laevsky sat down beside Samoylenko, and said with genuine feeling: “I’m
      a foolish, worthless, depraved man. The air I breathe, this wine, love,
      life in fact—for all that, I have given nothing in exchange so far
      but lying, idleness, and cowardice. Till now I have deceived myself and
      other people; I have been miserable about it, and my misery was cheap and
      common. I bow my back humbly before Von Koren’s hatred because at
      times I hate and despise myself.”
    

      Laevsky began again pacing from one end of the room to the other in
      excitement, and said:
    

      “I’m glad I see my faults clearly and am conscious of them.
      That will help me to reform and become a different man. My dear fellow, if
      only you knew how passionately, with what anguish, I long for such a
      change. And I swear to you I’ll be a man! I will! I don’t know
      whether it is the wine that is speaking in me, or whether it really is so,
      but it seems to me that it is long since I have spent such pure and lucid
      moments as I have just now with you.”
    

      “It’s time to sleep, brother,” said Samoylenko.
    

      “Yes, yes. . . . Excuse me; I’ll go directly.”
    

      Laevsky moved hurriedly about the furniture and windows, looking for his
      cap.
    

      “Thank you,” he muttered, sighing. “Thank you. . . .
      Kind and friendly words are better than charity. You have given me new
      life.”
    

      He found his cap, stopped, and looked guiltily at Samoylenko.
    

      “Alexandr Daviditch,” he said in an imploring voice.
    

      “What is it?”
    

      “Let me stay the night with you, my dear fellow!”
    

      “Certainly. . . . Why not?”
    

      Laevsky lay down on the sofa, and went on talking to the doctor for a long
      time.
    

      X
    

      Three days after the picnic, Marya Konstantinovna unexpectedly called on
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and without greeting her or taking off her hat,
      seized her by both hands, pressed them to her breast and said in great
      excitement:
    

      “My dear, I am deeply touched and moved: our dear kind-hearted
      doctor told my Nikodim Alexandritch yesterday that your husband was dead.
      Tell me, my dear . . . tell me, is it true?”
    

      “Yes, it’s true; he is dead,” answered Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna.
    

      “That is awful, awful, my dear! But there’s no evil without
      some compensation; your husband was no doubt a noble, wonderful, holy man,
      and such are more needed in Heaven than on earth.”
    

      Every line and feature in Marya Konstantinovna’s face began
      quivering as though little needles were jumping up and down under her
      skin; she gave an almond-oily smile and said, breathlessly,
      enthusiastically:
    

      “And so you are free, my dear. You can hold your head high now, and
      look people boldly in the face. Henceforth God and man will bless your
      union with Ivan Andreitch. It’s enchanting. I am trembling with joy,
      I can find no words. My dear, I will give you away. . . . Nikodim
      Alexandritch and I have been so fond of you, you will allow us to give our
      blessing to your pure, lawful union. When, when do you think of being
      married?”
    

      “I haven’t thought of it,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      freeing her hands.
    

      “That’s impossible, my dear. You have thought of it, you have.”
    

      “Upon my word, I haven’t,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      laughing. “What should we be married for? I see no necessity for it.
      We’ll go on living as we have lived.”
    

      “What are you saying!” cried Marya Konstantinovna in horror.
      “For God’s sake, what are you saying!”
    

      “Our getting married won’t make things any better. On the
      contrary, it will make them even worse. We shall lose our freedom.”
    

      “My dear, my dear, what are you saying!” exclaimed Marya
      Konstantinovna, stepping back and flinging up her hands. “You are
      talking wildly! Think what you are saying. You must settle down!”
    

      “‘Settle down.’ How do you mean? I have not lived yet,
      and you tell me to settle down.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna reflected that she really had not lived. She had
      finished her studies in a boarding-school and had been married to a man
      she did not love; then she had thrown in her lot with Laevsky, and had
      spent all her time with him on this empty, desolate coast, always
      expecting something better. Was that life?
    

      “I ought to be married though,” she thought, but remembering
      Kirilin and Atchmianov she flushed and said:
    

      “No, it’s impossible. Even if Ivan Andreitch begged me to on
      his knees—even then I would refuse.”
    

      Marya Konstantinovna sat on the sofa for a minute in silence, grave and
      mournful, gazing fixedly into space; then she got up and said coldly:
    

      “Good-bye, my dear! Forgive me for having troubled you. Though it’s
      not easy for me, it’s my duty to tell you that from this day all is
      over between us, and, in spite of my profound respect for Ivan Andreitch,
      the door of my house is closed to you henceforth.”
    

      She uttered these words with great solemnity and was herself overwhelmed
      by her solemn tone. Her face began quivering again; it assumed a soft
      almond-oily expression. She held out both hands to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      who was overcome with alarm and confusion, and said in an imploring voice:
    

      “My dear, allow me if only for a moment to be a mother or an elder
      sister to you! I will be as frank with you as a mother.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna felt in her bosom warmth, gladness, and pity for
      herself, as though her own mother had really risen up and were standing
      before her. She impulsively embraced Marya Konstantinovna and pressed her
      face to her shoulder. Both of them shed tears. They sat down on the sofa
      and for a few minutes sobbed without looking at one another or being able
      to utter a word.
    

      “My dear child,” began Marya Konstantinovna, “I will
      tell you some harsh truths, without sparing you.”
    

      “For God’s sake, for God’s sake, do!”
    

      “Trust me, my dear. You remember of all the ladies here, I was the
      only one to receive you. You horrified me from the very first day, but I
      had not the heart to treat you with disdain like all the rest. I grieved
      over dear, good Ivan Andreitch as though he were my son —a young man
      in a strange place, inexperienced, weak, with no mother; and I was
      worried, dreadfully worried. . . . My husband was opposed to our making
      his acquaintance, but I talked him over . . . persuaded him. . . . We
      began receiving Ivan Andreitch, and with him, of course, you. If we had
      not, he would have been insulted. I have a daughter, a son. . . . You
      understand the tender mind, the pure heart of childhood . . . ‘who
      so offendeth one of these little ones.’ . . . I received you into my
      house and trembled for my children. Oh, when you become a mother, you will
      understand my fears. And every one was surprised at my receiving you,
      excuse my saying so, as a respectable woman, and hinted to me . . . well,
      of course, slanders, suppositions. . . . At the bottom of my heart I
      blamed you, but you were unhappy, flighty, to be pitied, and my heart was
      wrung with pity for you.”
    

      “But why, why?” asked Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, trembling all
      over. “What harm have I done any one?”
    

      “You are a terrible sinner. You broke the vow you made your husband
      at the altar. You seduced a fine young man, who perhaps had he not met you
      might have taken a lawful partner for life from a good family in his own
      circle, and would have been like every one else now. You have ruined his
      youth. Don’t speak, don’t speak, my dear! I never believe that
      man is to blame for our sins. It is always the woman’s fault. Men
      are frivolous in domestic life; they are guided by their minds, and not by
      their hearts. There’s a great deal they don’t understand;
      woman understands it all. Everything depends on her. To her much is given
      and from her much will be required. Oh, my dear, if she had been more
      foolish or weaker than man on that side, God would not have entrusted her
      with the education of boys and girls. And then, my dear, you entered on
      the path of vice, forgetting all modesty; any other woman in your place
      would have hidden herself from people, would have sat shut up at home, and
      would only have been seen in the temple of God, pale, dressed all in black
      and weeping, and every one would have said in genuine compassion: ‘O
      Lord, this erring angel is coming back again to Thee . . . .’ But
      you, my dear, have forgotten all discretion; have lived openly,
      extravagantly; have seemed to be proud of your sin; you have been gay and
      laughing, and I, looking at you, shuddered with horror, and have been
      afraid that thunder from Heaven would strike our house while you were
      sitting with us. My dear, don’t speak, don’t speak,”
      cried Marya Konstantinovna, observing that Nadyezhda Fyodorovna wanted to
      speak. “Trust me, I will not deceive you, I will not hide one truth
      from the eyes of your soul. Listen to me, my dear. . . . God marks great
      sinners, and you have been marked-out: only think—your costumes have
      always been appalling.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, who had always had the highest opinion of her
      costumes, left off crying and looked at her with surprise.
    

      “Yes, appalling,” Marya Konstantinovna went on. “Any one
      could judge of your behaviour from the elaboration and gaudiness of your
      attire. People laughed and shrugged their shoulders as they looked at you,
      and I grieved, I grieved. . . . And forgive me, my dear; you are not nice
      in your person! When we met in the bathing-place, you made me tremble.
      Your outer clothing was decent enough, but your petticoat, your chemise. .
      . . My dear, I blushed! Poor Ivan Andreitch! No one ever ties his cravat
      properly, and from his linen and his boots, poor fellow! one can see he
      has no one at home to look after him. And he is always hungry, my darling,
      and of course, if there is no one at home to think of the samovar and the
      coffee, one is forced to spend half one’s salary at the pavilion.
      And it’s simply awful, awful in your home! No one else in the town
      has flies, but there’s no getting rid of them in your rooms: all the
      plates and dishes are black with them. If you look at the windows and the
      chairs, there’s nothing but dust, dead flies, and glasses. . . .
      What do you want glasses standing about for? And, my dear, the table’s
      not cleared till this time in the day. And one’s ashamed to go into
      your bedroom: underclothes flung about everywhere, india-rubber tubes
      hanging on the walls, pails and basins standing about. . . . My dear! A
      husband ought to know nothing, and his wife ought to be as neat as a
      little angel in his presence. I wake up every morning before it is light,
      and wash my face with cold water that my Nikodim Alexandritch may not see
      me looking drowsy.”
    

      “That’s all nonsense,” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna sobbed.
      “If only I were happy, but I am so unhappy!”
    

      “Yes, yes; you are very unhappy!” Marya Konstantinovna sighed,
      hardly able to restrain herself from weeping. “And there’s
      terrible grief in store for you in the future! A solitary old age,
      ill-health; and then you will have to answer at the dread judgment seat. .
      . It’s awful, awful. Now fate itself holds out to you a helping
      hand, and you madly thrust it from you. Be married, make haste and be
      married!”
    

      “Yes, we must, we must,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna; “but
      it’s impossible!”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “It’s impossible. Oh, if only you knew!”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna had an impulse to tell her about Kirilin, and how the
      evening before she had met handsome young Atchmianov at the harbour, and
      how the mad, ridiculous idea had occurred to her of cancelling her debt
      for three hundred; it had amused her very much, and she returned home late
      in the evening feeling that she had sold herself and was irrevocably lost.
      She did not know herself how it had happened. And she longed to swear to
      Marya Konstantinovna that she would certainly pay that debt, but sobs and
      shame prevented her from speaking.
    

      “I am going away,” she said. “Ivan Andreitch may stay,
      but I am going.”
    

      “Where?”
    

      “To Russia.”
    

      “But how will you live there? Why, you have nothing.”
    

      “I will do translation, or . . . or I will open a library . . . .”
    

      “Don’t let your fancy run away with you, my dear. You must
      have money for a library. Well, I will leave you now, and you calm
      yourself and think things over, and to-morrow come and see me, bright and
      happy. That will be enchanting! Well, good-bye, my angel. Let me kiss you.”
    

      Marya Konstantinovna kissed Nadyezhda Fyodorovna on the forehead, made the
      sign of the cross over her, and softly withdrew. It was getting dark, and
      Olga lighted up in the kitchen. Still crying, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna went
      into the bedroom and lay down on the bed. She began to be very feverish.
      She undressed without getting up, crumpled up her clothes at her feet, and
      curled herself up under the bedclothes. She was thirsty, and there was no
      one to give her something to drink.
    

      “I’ll pay it back!” she said to herself, and it seemed
      to her in delirium that she was sitting beside some sick woman, and
      recognised her as herself. “I’ll pay it back. It would be
      stupid to imagine that it was for money I . . . I will go away and send
      him the money from Petersburg. At first a hundred . . . then another
      hundred . . . and then the third hundred. . . .”
    

      It was late at night when Laevsky came in.
    

      “At first a hundred . . .” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna said to him,
      “then another hundred . . .”
    

      “You ought to take some quinine,” he said, and thought,
      “To-morrow is Wednesday; the steamer goes and I am not going in it.
      So I shall have to go on living here till Saturday.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna knelt up in bed.
    

      “I didn’t say anything just now, did I?” she asked,
      smiling and screwing up her eyes at the light.
    

      “No, nothing. We shall have to send for the doctor to-morrow
      morning. Go to sleep.”
    

      He took his pillow and went to the door. Ever since he had finally made up
      his mind to go away and leave Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, she had begun to raise
      in him pity and a sense of guilt; he felt a little ashamed in her
      presence, as though in the presence of a sick or old horse whom one has
      decided to kill. He stopped in the doorway and looked round at her.
    

      “I was out of humour at the picnic and said something rude to you.
      Forgive me, for God’s sake!”
    

      Saying this, he went off to his study, lay down, and for a long while
      could not get to sleep.
    

      Next morning when Samoylenko, attired, as it was a holiday, in full-dress
      uniform with epaulettes on his shoulders and decorations on his breast,
      came out of the bedroom after feeling Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s pulse
      and looking at her tongue, Laevsky, who was standing in the doorway, asked
      him anxiously: “Well? Well?”
    

      There was an expression of terror, of extreme uneasiness, and of hope on
      his face.
    

      “Don’t worry yourself; there’s nothing dangerous,”
      said Samoylenko; “it’s the usual fever.”
    

      “I don’t mean that.” Laevsky frowned impatiently.
      “Have you got the money?”
    

      “My dear soul, forgive me,” he whispered, looking round at the
      door and overcome with confusion.
    

      “For God’s sake, forgive me! No one has anything to spare, and
      I’ve only been able to collect by five- and by ten-rouble notes. . .
      . Only a hundred and ten in all. To-day I’ll speak to some one else.
      Have patience.”
    

      “But Saturday is the latest date,” whispered Laevsky,
      trembling with impatience. “By all that’s sacred, get it by
      Saturday! If I don’t get away by Saturday, nothing’s any use,
      nothing! I can’t understand how a doctor can be without money!”
    

      “Lord have mercy on us!” Samoylenko whispered rapidly and
      intensely, and there was positively a breaking note in his throat. “I’ve
      been stripped of everything; I am owed seven thousand, and I’m in
      debt all round. Is it my fault?”
    

      “Then you’ll get it by Saturday? Yes?”
    

      “I’ll try.”
    

      “I implore you, my dear fellow! So that the money may be in my hands
      by Friday morning!”
    

      Samoylenko sat down and prescribed solution of quinine and kalii bromati
      and tincture of rhubarb, tincturÃ¦ gentianÃ¦, aquÃ¦ foeniculi —all in
      one mixture, added some pink syrup to sweeten it, and went away.
    

      XI
    

      “You look as though you were coming to arrest me,” said Von
      Koren, seeing Samoylenko coming in, in his full-dress uniform.
    

      “I was passing by and thought: ‘Suppose I go in and pay my
      respects to zoology,’” said Samoylenko, sitting down at the
      big table, knocked together by the zoologist himself out of plain boards.
      “Good-morning, holy father,” he said to the deacon, who was
      sitting in the window, copying something. “I’ll stay a minute
      and then run home to see about dinner. It’s time. . . . I’m
      not hindering you?”
    

      “Not in the least,” answered the zoologist, laying out over
      the table slips of paper covered with small writing. “We are busy
      copying.”
    

      “Ah! . . . Oh, my goodness, my goodness! . . .” sighed
      Samoylenko. He cautiously took up from the table a dusty book on which
      there was lying a dead dried spider, and said: “Only fancy, though;
      some little green beetle is going about its business, when suddenly a
      monster like this swoops down upon it. I can fancy its terror.”
    

      “Yes, I suppose so.”
    

      “Is poison given it to protect it from its enemies?”
    

      “Yes, to protect it and enable it to attack.”
    

      “To be sure, to be sure. . . . And everything in nature, my dear
      fellows, is consistent and can be explained,” sighed Samoylenko;
      “only I tell you what I don’t understand. You’re a man
      of very great intellect, so explain it to me, please. There are, you know,
      little beasts no bigger than rats, rather handsome to look at, but nasty
      and immoral in the extreme, let me tell you. Suppose such a little beast
      is running in the woods. He sees a bird; he catches it and devours it. He
      goes on and sees in the grass a nest of eggs; he does not want to eat them—he
      is not hungry, but yet he tastes one egg and scatters the others out of
      the nest with his paw. Then he meets a frog and begins to play with it;
      when he has tormented the frog he goes on licking himself and meets a
      beetle; he crushes the beetle with his paw . . . and so he spoils and
      destroys everything on his way. . . . He creeps into other beasts’
      holes, tears up the anthills, cracks the snail’s shell. If he meets
      a rat, he fights with it; if he meets a snake or a mouse, he must strangle
      it; and so the whole day long. Come, tell me: what is the use of a beast
      like that? Why was he created?”
    

      “I don’t know what animal you are talking of,” said Von
      Koren; “most likely one of the insectivora. Well, he got hold of the
      bird because it was incautious; he broke the nest of eggs because the bird
      was not skilful, had made the nest badly and did not know how to conceal
      it. The frog probably had some defect in its colouring or he would not
      have seen it, and so on. Your little beast only destroys the weak, the
      unskilful, the careless—in fact, those who have defects which nature
      does not think fit to hand on to posterity. Only the cleverer, the
      stronger, the more careful and developed survive; and so your little
      beast, without suspecting it, is serving the great ends of perfecting
      creation.”
    

      “Yes, yes, yes. . . . By the way, brother,” said Samoylenko
      carelessly, “lend me a hundred roubles.”
    

      “Very good. There are some very interesting types among the
      insectivorous mammals. For instance, the mole is said to be useful because
      he devours noxious insects. There is a story that some German sent William
      I. a fur coat made of moleskins, and the Emperor ordered him to be
      reproved for having destroyed so great a number of useful animals. And yet
      the mole is not a bit less cruel than your little beast, and is very
      mischievous besides, as he spoils meadows terribly.”
    

      Von Koren opened a box and took out a hundred-rouble note.
    

      “The mole has a powerful thorax, just like the bat,” he went
      on, shutting the box; “the bones and muscles are tremendously
      developed, the mouth is extraordinarily powerfully furnished. If it had
      the proportions of an elephant, it would be an all-destructive, invincible
      animal. It is interesting when two moles meet underground; they begin at
      once as though by agreement digging a little platform; they need the
      platform in order to have a battle more conveniently. When they have made
      it they enter upon a ferocious struggle and fight till the weaker one
      falls. Take the hundred roubles,” said Von Koren, dropping his
      voice, “but only on condition that you’re not borrowing it for
      Laevsky.”
    

      “And if it were for Laevsky,” cried Samoylenko, flaring up,
      “what is that to you?”
    

      “I can’t give it to you for Laevsky. I know you like lending
      people money. You would give it to Kerim, the brigand, if he were to ask
      you; but, excuse me, I can’t assist you in that direction.”
    

      “Yes, it is for Laevsky I am asking it,” said Samoylenko,
      standing up and waving his right arm. “Yes! For Laevsky! And no one,
      fiend or devil, has a right to dictate to me how to dispose of my own
      money. It doesn’t suit you to lend it me? No?”
    

      The deacon began laughing.
    

      “Don’t get excited, but be reasonable,” said the
      zoologist. “To shower benefits on Mr. Laevsky is, to my thinking, as
      senseless as to water weeds or to feed locusts.”
    

      “To my thinking, it is our duty to help our neighbours!” cried
      Samoylenko.
    

      “In that case, help that hungry Turk who is lying under the fence!
      He is a workman and more useful and indispensable than your Laevsky. Give
      him that hundred-rouble note! Or subscribe a hundred roubles to my
      expedition!”
    

      “Will you give me the money or not? I ask you!”
    

      “Tell me openly: what does he want money for?”
    

      “It’s not a secret; he wants to go to Petersburg on Saturday.”
    

      “So that is it!” Von Koren drawled out. “Aha! . . . We
      understand. And is she going with him, or how is it to be?”
    

      “She’s staying here for the time. He’ll arrange his
      affairs in Petersburg and send her the money, and then she’ll go.”
    

      “That’s smart!” said the zoologist, and he gave a short
      tenor laugh. “Smart, well planned.”
    

      He went rapidly up to Samoylenko, and standing face to face with him, and
      looking him in the eyes, asked: “Tell me now honestly: is he tired
      of her? Yes? tell me: is he tired of her? Yes?”
    

      “Yes,” Samoylenko articulated, beginning to perspire.
    

      “How repulsive it is!” said Von Koren, and from his face it
      could be seen that he felt repulsion. “One of two things, Alexandr
      Daviditch: either you are in the plot with him, or, excuse my saying so,
      you are a simpleton. Surely you must see that he is taking you in like a
      child in the most shameless way? Why, it’s as clear as day that he
      wants to get rid of her and abandon her here. She’ll be left a
      burden on you. It is as clear as day that you will have to send her to
      Petersburg at your expense. Surely your fine friend can’t have so
      blinded you by his dazzling qualities that you can’t see the
      simplest thing?”
    

      “That’s all supposition,” said Samoylenko, sitting down.
    

      “Supposition? But why is he going alone instead of taking her with
      him? And ask him why he doesn’t send her off first. The sly beast!”
    

      Overcome with sudden doubts and suspicions about his friend, Samoylenko
      weakened and took a humbler tone.
    

      “But it’s impossible,” he said, recalling the night
      Laevsky had spent at his house. “He is so unhappy!”
    

      “What of that? Thieves and incendiaries are unhappy too!”
    

      “Even supposing you are right . . .” said Samoylenko,
      hesitating. “Let us admit it. . . . Still, he’s a young man in
      a strange place . . . a student. We have been students, too, and there is
      no one but us to come to his assistance.”
    

      “To help him to do abominable things, because he and you at
      different times have been at universities, and neither of you did anything
      there! What nonsense!”
    

      “Stop; let us talk it over coolly. I imagine it will be possible to
      make some arrangement. . . .” Samoylenko reflected, twiddling his
      fingers. “I’ll give him the money, you see, but make him
      promise on his honour that within a week he’ll send Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna the money for the journey.”
    

      “And he’ll give you his word of honour—in fact, he’ll
      shed tears and believe in it himself; but what’s his word of honour
      worth? He won’t keep it, and when in a year or two you meet him on
      the Nevsky Prospect with a new mistress on his arm, he’ll excuse
      himself on the ground that he has been crippled by civilisation, and that
      he is made after the pattern of Rudin. Drop him, for God’s sake!
      Keep away from the filth; don’t stir it up with both hands!”
    

      Samoylenko thought for a minute and said resolutely:
    

      “But I shall give him the money all the same. As you please. I can’t
      bring myself to refuse a man simply on an assumption.”
    

      “Very fine, too. You can kiss him if you like.”
    

      “Give me the hundred roubles, then,” Samoylenko asked timidly.
    

      “I won’t.”
    

      A silence followed. Samoylenko was quite crushed; his face wore a guilty,
      abashed, and ingratiating expression, and it was strange to see this
      pitiful, childish, shamefaced countenance on a huge man wearing epaulettes
      and orders of merit.
    

      “The bishop here goes the round of his diocese on horseback instead
      of in a carriage,” said the deacon, laying down his pen. “It’s
      extremely touching to see him sit on his horse. His simplicity and
      humility are full of Biblical grandeur.”
    

      “Is he a good man?” asked Von Koren, who was glad to change
      the conversation.
    

      “Of course! If he hadn’t been a good man, do you suppose he
      would have been consecrated a bishop?”
    

      “Among the bishops are to be found good and gifted men,” said
      Von Koren. “The only drawback is that some of them have the weakness
      to imagine themselves statesmen. One busies himself with Russification,
      another criticises the sciences. That’s not their business. They had
      much better look into their consistory a little.”
    

      “A layman cannot judge of bishops.”
    

      “Why so, deacon? A bishop is a man just the same as you or I.”
    

      “The same, but not the same.” The deacon was offended and took
      up his pen. “If you had been the same, the Divine Grace would have
      rested upon you, and you would have been bishop yourself; and since you
      are not bishop, it follows you are not the same.”
    

      “Don’t talk nonsense, deacon,” said Samoylenko
      dejectedly. “Listen to what I suggest,” he said, turning to
      Von Koren. “Don’t give me that hundred roubles. You’ll
      be having your dinners with me for three months before the winter, so let
      me have the money beforehand for three months.”
    

      “I won’t.”
    

      Samoylenko bGlinked and turned crimson; he mechanically drew towards him
      the book with the spider on it and looked at it, then he got up and took
      his hat.
    

      Von Koren felt sorry for him.
    

      “What it is to have to live and do with people like this,”
      said the zoologist, and he kicked a paper into the corner with
      indignation. “You must understand that this is not kindness, it is
      not love, but cowardice, slackness, poison! What’s gained by reason
      is lost by your flabby good-for-nothing hearts! When I was ill with
      typhoid as a schoolboy, my aunt in her sympathy gave me pickled mushrooms
      to eat, and I very nearly died. You, and my aunt too, must understand that
      love for man is not to be found in the heart or the stomach or the bowels,
      but here!”
    

      Von Koren slapped himself on the forehead.
    

      “Take it,” he said, and thrust a hundred-rouble note into his
      hand.
    

      “You’ve no need to be angry, Kolya,” said Samoylenko
      mildly, folding up the note. “I quite understand you, but . . . you
      must put yourself in my place.”
    

      “You are an old woman, that’s what you are.”
    

      The deacon burst out laughing.
    

      “Hear my last request, Alexandr Daviditch,” said Von Koren
      hotly. “When you give that scoundrel the money, make it a condition
      that he takes his lady with him, or sends her on ahead, and don’t
      give it him without. There’s no need to stand on ceremony with him.
      Tell him so, or, if you don’t, I give you my word I’ll go to
      his office and kick him downstairs, and I’ll break off all
      acquaintance with you. So you’d better know it.”
    

      “Well! To go with her or send her on beforehand will be more
      convenient for him,” said Samoylenko. “He’ll be
      delighted indeed. Well, goodbye.”
    

      He said good-bye affectionately and went out, but before shutting the door
      after him, he looked round at Von Koren and, with a ferocious face, said:
    

      “It’s the Germans who have ruined you, brother! Yes! The
      Germans!”
    

      XII
    

      Next day, Thursday, Marya Konstantinovna was celebrating the birthday of
      her Kostya. All were invited to come at midday and eat pies, and in the
      evening to drink chocolate. When Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna arrived
      in the evening, the zoologist, who was already sitting in the
      drawing-room, drinking chocolate, asked Samoylenko:
    

      “Have you talked to him?”
    

      “Not yet.”
    

      “Mind now, don’t stand on ceremony. I can’t understand
      the insolence of these people! Why, they know perfectly well the view
      taken by this family of their cohabitation, and yet they force themselves
      in here.”
    

      “If one is to pay attention to every prejudice,” said
      Samoylenko, “one could go nowhere.”
    

      “Do you mean to say that the repugnance felt by the masses for
      illicit love and moral laxity is a prejudice?”
    

      “Of course it is. It’s prejudice and hate. When the soldiers
      see a girl of light behaviour, they laugh and whistle; but just ask them
      what they are themselves.”
    

      “It’s not for nothing they whistle. The fact that girls
      strangle their illegitimate children and go to prison for it, and that
      Anna Karenin flung herself under the train, and that in the villages they
      smear the gates with tar, and that you and I, without knowing why, are
      pleased by Katya’s purity, and that every one of us feels a vague
      craving for pure love, though he knows there is no such love—is all
      that prejudice? That is the one thing, brother, which has survived intact
      from natural selection, and, if it were not for that obscure force
      regulating the relations of the sexes, the Laevskys would have it all
      their own way, and mankind would degenerate in two years.”
    

      Laevsky came into the drawing-room, greeted every one, and shaking hands
      with Von Koren, smiled ingratiatingly. He waited for a favourable moment
      and said to Samoylenko:
    

      “Excuse me, Alexandr Daviditch, I must say two words to you.”
    

      Samoylenko got up, put his arm round Laevsky’s waist, and both of
      them went into Nikodim Alexandritch’s study.
    

      “To-morrow’s Friday,” said Laevsky, biting his nails.
      “Have you got what you promised?”
    

      “I’ve only got two hundred. I’ll get the rest to-day or
      to-morrow. Don’t worry yourself.”
    

      “Thank God . . .” sighed Laevsky, and his hands began
      trembling with joy. “You are saving me, Alexandr Daviditch, and I
      swear to you by God, by my happiness and anything you like, I’ll
      send you the money as soon as I arrive. And I’ll send you my old
      debt too.”
    

      “Look here, Vanya . . .” said Samoylenko, turning crimson and
      taking him by the button. “You must forgive my meddling in your
      private affairs, but . . . why shouldn’t you take Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna with you?”
    

      “You queer fellow. How is that possible? One of us must stay, or our
      creditors will raise an outcry. You see, I owe seven hundred or more to
      the shops. Only wait, and I will send them the money. I’ll stop
      their mouths, and then she can come away.”
    

      “I see. . . . But why shouldn’t you send her on first?”
    

      “My goodness, as though that were possible!” Laevsky was
      horrified. “Why, she’s a woman; what would she do there alone?
      What does she know about it? That would only be a loss of time and a
      useless waste of money.”
    

      “That’s reasonable . . .” thought Samoylenko, but
      remembering his conversation with Von Koren, he looked down and said
      sullenly: “I can’t agree with you. Either go with her or send
      her first; otherwise . . . otherwise I won’t give you the money.
      Those are my last words. . .”
    

      He staggered back, lurched backwards against the door, and went into the
      drawing-room, crimson, and overcome with confusion.
    

      “Friday . . . Friday,” thought Laevsky, going back into the
      drawing-room. “Friday. . . .”
    

      He was handed a cup of chocolate; he burnt his lips and tongue with the
      scalding chocolate and thought: “Friday . . . Friday. . . .”
    

      For some reason he could not get the word “Friday” out of his
      head; he could think of nothing but Friday, and the only thing that was
      clear to him, not in his brain but somewhere in his heart, was that he
      would not get off on Saturday. Before him stood Nikodim Alexandritch, very
      neat, with his hair combed over his temples, saying:
    

      “Please take something to eat. . . .”
    

      Marya Konstantinovna showed the visitors Katya’s school report and
      said, drawling:
    

      “It’s very, very difficult to do well at school nowadays! So
      much is expected . . .”
    

      “Mamma!” groaned Katya, not knowing where to hide her
      confusion at the praises of the company.
    

      Laevsky, too, looked at the report and praised it. Scripture, Russian
      language, conduct, fives and fours, danced before his eyes, and all this,
      mixed with the haunting refrain of “Friday,” with the
      carefully combed locks of Nikodim Alexandritch and the red cheeks of
      Katya, produced on him a sensation of such immense overwhelming boredom
      that he almost shrieked with despair and asked himself: “Is it
      possible, is it possible I shall not get away?”
    

      They put two card tables side by side and sat down to play post. Laevsky
      sat down too.
    

      “Friday . . . Friday . . .” he kept thinking, as he smiled and
      took a pencil out of his pocket. “Friday. . . .”
    

      He wanted to think over his position, and was afraid to think. It was
      terrible to him to realise that the doctor had detected him in the
      deception which he had so long and carefully concealed from himself. Every
      time he thought of his future he would not let his thoughts have full
      rein. He would get into the train and set off, and thereby the problem of
      his life would be solved, and he did not let his thoughts go farther. Like
      a far-away dim light in the fields, the thought sometimes flickered in his
      mind that in one of the side-streets of Petersburg, in the remote future,
      he would have to have recourse to a tiny lie in order to get rid of
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and pay his debts; he would tell a lie only once, and
      then a completely new life would begin. And that was right: at the price
      of a small lie he would win so much truth.
    

      Now when by his blunt refusal the doctor had crudely hinted at his
      deception, he began to understand that he would need deception not only in
      the remote future, but to-day, and to-morrow, and in a month’s time,
      and perhaps up to the very end of his life. In fact, in order to get away
      he would have to lie to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, to his creditors, and to his
      superiors in the Service; then, in order to get money in Petersburg, he
      would have to lie to his mother, to tell her that he had already broken
      with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna; and his mother would not give him more than
      five hundred roubles, so he had already deceived the doctor, as he would
      not be in a position to pay him back the money within a short time.
      Afterwards, when Nadyezhda Fyodorovna came to Petersburg, he would have to
      resort to a regular series of deceptions, little and big, in order to get
      free of her; and again there would be tears, boredom, a disgusting
      existence, remorse, and so there would be no new life. Deception and
      nothing more. A whole mountain of lies rose before Laevsky’s
      imagination. To leap over it at one bound and not to do his lying
      piecemeal, he would have to bring himself to stern, uncompromising action;
      for instance, to getting up without saying a word, putting on his hat, and
      at once setting off without money and without explanation. But Laevsky
      felt that was impossible for him.
    

      “Friday, Friday . . .” he thought. “Friday. . . .”
    

      They wrote little notes, folded them in two, and put them in Nikodim
      Alexandritch’s old top-hat. When there were a sufficient heap of
      notes, Kostya, who acted the part of postman, walked round the table and
      delivered them. The deacon, Katya, and Kostya, who received amusing notes
      and tried to write as funnily as they could, were highly delighted.
    

      “We must have a little talk,” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna read in a
      little note; she glanced at Marya Konstantinovna, who gave her an
      almond-oily smile and nodded.
    

      “Talk of what?” thought Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. “If one
      can’t tell the whole, it’s no use talking.”
    

      Before going out for the evening she had tied Laevsky’s cravat for
      him, and that simple action filled her soul with tenderness and sorrow.
      The anxiety in his face, his absent-minded looks, his pallor, and the
      incomprehensible change that had taken place in him of late, and the fact
      that she had a terrible revolting secret from him, and the fact that her
      hands trembled when she tied his cravat—all this seemed to tell her
      that they had not long left to be together. She looked at him as though he
      were an ikon, with terror and penitence, and thought: “Forgive,
      forgive.”
    

      Opposite her was sitting Atchmianov, and he never took his black,
      love-sick eyes off her. She was stirred by passion; she was ashamed of
      herself, and afraid that even her misery and sorrow would not prevent her
      from yielding to impure desire to-morrow, if not to-day —and that,
      like a drunkard, she would not have the strength to stop herself.
    

      She made up her mind to go away that she might not continue this life,
      shameful for herself, and humiliating for Laevsky. She would beseech him
      with tears to let her go; and if he opposed her, she would go away
      secretly. She would not tell him what had happened; let him keep a pure
      memory of her.
    

      “I love you, I love you, I love you,” she read. It was from
      Atchmianov.
    

      She would live in some far remote place, would work and send Laevsky,
      “anonymously,” money, embroidered shirts, and tobacco, and
      would return to him only in old age or if he were dangerously ill and
      needed a nurse. When in his old age he learned what were her reasons for
      leaving him and refusing to be his wife, he would appreciate her sacrifice
      and forgive.
    

      “You’ve got a long nose.” That must be from the deacon
      or Kostya.
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna imagined how, parting from Laevsky, she would embrace
      him warmly, would kiss his hand, and would swear to love him all her life,
      all her life, and then, living in obscurity among strangers, she would
      every day think that somewhere she had a friend, some one she loved—a
      pure, noble, lofty man who kept a pure memory of her.
    

      “If you don’t give me an interview to-day, I shall take
      measures, I assure you on my word of honour. You can’t treat decent
      people like this; you must understand that.” That was from Kirilin.
    

      XIII
    

      Laevsky received two notes; he opened one and read: “Don’t go
      away, my darling.”
    

      “Who could have written that?” he thought. “Not
      Samoylenko, of course. And not the deacon, for he doesn’t know I
      want to go away. Von Koren, perhaps?”
    

      The zoologist bent over the table and drew a pyramid. Laevsky fancied that
      his eyes were smiling.
    

      “Most likely Samoylenko . . . has been gossiping,” thought
      Laevsky.
    

      In the other note, in the same disguised angular handwriting with long
      tails to the letters, was written: “Somebody won’t go away on
      Saturday.”
    

      “A stupid gibe,” thought Laevsky. “Friday, Friday. . . .”
    

      Something rose in his throat. He touched his collar and coughed, but
      instead of a cough a laugh broke from his throat.
    

      “Ha-ha-ha!” he laughed. “Ha-ha-ha! What am I laughing
      at? Ha-ha-ha!”
    

      He tried to restrain himself, covered his mouth with his hand, but the
      laugh choked his chest and throat, and his hand could not cover his mouth.
    

      “How stupid it is!” he thought, rolling with laughter. “Have
      I gone out of my mind?”
    

      The laugh grew shriller and shriller, and became something like the bark
      of a lap-dog. Laevsky tried to get up from the table, but his legs would
      not obey him and his right hand was strangely, without his volition,
      dancing on the table, convulsively clutching and crumpling up the bits of
      paper. He saw looks of wonder, Samoylenko’s grave, frightened face,
      and the eyes of the zoologist full of cold irony and disgust, and realised
      that he was in hysterics.
    

      “How hideous, how shameful!” he thought, feeling the warmth of
      tears on his face. “. . . Oh, oh, what a disgrace! It has never
      happened to me. . . .”
    

      They took him under his arms, and supporting his head from behind, led him
      away; a glass gleamed before his eyes and knocked against his teeth, and
      the water was spilt on his breast; he was in a little room, with two beds
      in the middle, side by side, covered by two snow-white quilts. He dropped
      on one of the beds and sobbed.
    

      “It’s nothing, it’s nothing,” Samoylenko kept
      saying; “it does happen . . . it does happen. . . .”
    

      Chill with horror, trembling all over and dreading something awful,
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna stood by the bedside and kept asking:
    

      “What is it? What is it? For God’s sake, tell me.”
    

      “Can Kirilin have written him something?” she thought.
    

      “It’s nothing,” said Laevsky, laughing and crying;
      “go away, darling.”
    

      His face expressed neither hatred nor repulsion: so he knew nothing;
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was somewhat reassured, and she went into the
      drawing-room.
    

      “Don’t agitate yourself, my dear!” said Marya
      Konstantinovna, sitting down beside her and taking her hand. “It
      will pass. Men are just as weak as we poor sinners. You are both going
      through a crisis. . . . One can so well understand it! Well, my dear, I am
      waiting for an answer. Let us have a little talk.”
    

      “No, we are not going to talk,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      listening to Laevsky’s sobs. “I feel depressed. . . . You must
      allow me to go home.”
    

      “What do you mean, what do you mean, my dear?” cried Marya
      Konstantinovna in alarm. “Do you think I could let you go without
      supper? We will have something to eat, and then you may go with my
      blessing.”
    

      “I feel miserable . . .” whispered Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and
      she caught at the arm of the chair with both hands to avoid falling.
    

      “He’s got a touch of hysterics,” said Von Koren gaily,
      coming into the drawing-room, but seeing Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, he was
      taken aback and retreated.
    

      When the attack was over, Laevsky sat on the strange bed and thought.
    

      “Disgraceful! I’ve been howling like some wretched girl! I
      must have been absurd and disgusting. I will go away by the back stairs .
      . . . But that would seem as though I took my hysterics too seriously. I
      ought to take it as a joke. . . .”
    

      He looked in the looking-glass, sat there for some time, and went back
      into the drawing-room.
    

      “Here I am,” he said, smiling; he felt agonisingly ashamed,
      and he felt others were ashamed in his presence. “Fancy such a thing
      happening,” he said, sitting down. “I was sitting here, and
      all of a sudden, do you know, I felt a terrible piercing pain in my side .
      . . unendurable, my nerves could not stand it, and . . . and it led to
      this silly performance. This is the age of nerves; there is no help for
      it.”
    

      At supper he drank some wine, and, from time to time, with an abrupt sigh
      rubbed his side as though to suggest that he still felt the pain. And no
      one, except Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, believed him, and he saw that.
    

      After nine o’clock they went for a walk on the boulevard. Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, afraid that Kirilin would speak to her, did her best to keep
      all the time beside Marya Konstantinovna and the children. She felt weak
      with fear and misery, and felt she was going to be feverish; she was
      exhausted and her legs would hardly move, but she did not go home, because
      she felt sure that she would be followed by Kirilin or Atchmianov or both
      at once. Kirilin walked behind her with Nikodim Alexandritch, and kept
      humming in an undertone:
    

      “I don’t al-low people to play with me! I don’t al-low
      it.”
    

      From the boulevard they went back to the pavilion and walked along the
      beach, and looked for a long time at the phosphorescence on the water. Von
      Koren began telling them why it looked phosphorescent.
    

      XIV
    

      “It’s time I went to my vint. . . . They will be
      waiting for me,” said Laevsky. “Good-bye, my friends.”
    

      “I’ll come with you; wait a minute,” said Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, and she took his arm.
    

      They said good-bye to the company and went away. Kirilin took leave too,
      and saying that he was going the same way, went along beside them.
    

      “What will be, will be,” thought Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. “So
      be it. . . .”
    

      And it seemed to her that all the evil memories in her head had taken
      shape and were walking beside her in the darkness, breathing heavily,
      while she, like a fly that had fallen into the inkpot, was crawling
      painfully along the pavement and smirching Laevsky’s side and arm
      with blackness.
    

      If Kirilin should do anything horrid, she thought, not he but she would be
      to blame for it. There was a time when no man would have talked to her as
      Kirilin had done, and she had torn up her security like a thread and
      destroyed it irrevocably—who was to blame for it? Intoxicated by her
      passions she had smiled at a complete stranger, probably just because he
      was tall and a fine figure. After two meetings she was weary of him, had
      thrown him over, and did not that, she thought now, give him the right to
      treat her as he chose?
    

      “Here I’ll say good-bye to you, darling,” said Laevsky.
      “Ilya Mihalitch will see you home.”
    

      He nodded to Kirilin, and, quickly crossing the boulevard, walked along
      the street to Sheshkovsky’s, where there were lights in the windows,
      and then they heard the gate bang as he went in.
    

      “Allow me to have an explanation with you,” said Kirilin.
      “I’m not a boy, not some Atchkasov or Latchkasov, Zatchkasov.
      . . . I demand serious attention.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s heart began beating violently. She made no
      reply.
    

      “The abrupt change in your behaviour to me I put down at first to
      coquetry,” Kirilin went on; “now I see that you don’t
      know how to behave with gentlemanly people. You simply wanted to play with
      me, as you are playing with that wretched Armenian boy; but I’m a
      gentleman and I insist on being treated like a gentleman. And so I am at
      your service. . . .”
    

      “I’m miserable,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna beginning to
      cry, and to hide her tears she turned away.
    

      “I’m miserable too,” said Kirilin, “but what of
      that?”
    

      Kirilin was silent for a space, then he said distinctly and emphatically:
    

      “I repeat, madam, that if you do not give me an interview this
      evening, I’ll make a scandal this very evening.”
    

      “Let me off this evening,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and she
      did not recognise her own voice, it was so weak and pitiful.
    

      “I must give you a lesson. . . . Excuse me for the roughness of my
      tone, but it’s necessary to give you a lesson. Yes, I regret to say
      I must give you a lesson. I insist on two interviews—to-day and
      to-morrow. After to-morrow you are perfectly free and can go wherever you
      like with any one you choose. To-day and to-morrow.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna went up to her gate and stopped.
    

      “Let me go,” she murmured, trembling all over and seeing
      nothing before her in the darkness but his white tunic. “You’re
      right: I’m a horrible woman. . . . I’m to blame, but let me go
      . . . I beg you.” She touched his cold hand and shuddered. “I
      beseech you. . . .”
    

      “Alas!” sighed Kirilin, “alas! it’s not part of my
      plan to let you go; I only mean to give you a lesson and make you realise.
      And what’s more, madam, I’ve too little faith in women.”
    

      “I’m miserable. . . .”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna listened to the even splash of the sea, looked at the
      sky studded with stars, and longed to make haste and end it all, and get
      away from the cursed sensation of life, with its sea, stars, men, fever.
    

      “Only not in my home,” she said coldly. “Take me
      somewhere else.”
    

      “Come to Muridov’s. That’s better.”
    

      “Where’s that?”
    

      “Near the old wall.”
    

      She walked quickly along the street and then turned into the side-street
      that led towards the mountains. It was dark. There were pale streaks of
      light here and there on the pavement, from the lighted windows, and it
      seemed to her that, like a fly, she kept falling into the ink and crawling
      out into the light again. At one point he stumbled, almost fell down and
      burst out laughing.
    

      “He’s drunk,” thought Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. “Never
      mind. . . . Never mind. . . . So be it.”
    

      Atchmianov, too, soon took leave of the party and followed Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna to ask her to go for a row. He went to her house and looked
      over the fence: the windows were wide open, there were no lights.
    

      “Nadyezhda Fyodorovna!” he called.
    

      A moment passed, he called again.
    

      “Who’s there?” he heard Olga’s voice.
    

      “Is Nadyezhda Fyodorovna at home?”
    

      “No, she has not come in yet.”
    

      “Strange . . . very strange,” thought Atchmianov, feeling very
      uneasy. “She went home. . . .”
    

      He walked along the boulevard, then along the street, and glanced in at
      the windows of Sheshkovsky’s. Laevsky was sitting at the table
      without his coat on, looking attentively at his cards.
    

      “Strange, strange,” muttered Atchmianov, and remembering
      Laevsky’s hysterics, he felt ashamed. “If she is not at home,
      where is she?”
    

      He went to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s lodgings again, and looked at the
      dark windows.
    

      “It’s a cheat, a cheat . . .” he thought, remembering
      that, meeting him at midday at Marya Konstantinovna’s, she had
      promised to go in a boat with him that evening.
    

      The windows of the house where Kirilin lived were dark, and there was a
      policeman sitting asleep on a little bench at the gate. Everything was
      clear to Atchmianov when he looked at the windows and the policeman. He
      made up his mind to go home, and set off in that direction, but somehow
      found himself near Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s lodgings again. He sat
      down on the bench near the gate and took off his hat, feeling that his
      head was burning with jealousy and resentment.
    

      The clock in the town church only struck twice in the twenty-four hours—at
      midday and midnight. Soon after it struck midnight he heard hurried
      footsteps.
    

      “To-morrow evening, then, again at Muridov’s,”
      Atchmianov heard, and he recognised Kirilin’s voice. “At eight
      o’clock; good-bye!”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna made her appearance near the garden. Without noticing
      that Atchmianov was sitting on the bench, she passed beside him like a
      shadow, opened the gate, and leaving it open, went into the house. In her
      own room she lighted the candle and quickly undressed, but instead of
      getting into bed, she sank on her knees before a chair, flung her arms
      round it, and rested her head on it.
    

      It was past two when Laevsky came home.
    

      XV
    

      Having made up his mind to lie, not all at once but piecemeal, Laevsky
      went soon after one o’clock next day to Samoylenko to ask for the
      money that he might be sure to get off on Saturday. After his hysterical
      attack, which had added an acute feeling of shame to his depressed state
      of mind, it was unthinkable to remain in the town. If Samoylenko should
      insist on his conditions, he thought it would be possible to agree to them
      and take the money, and next day, just as he was starting, to say that
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna refused to go. He would be able to persuade her that
      evening that the whole arrangement would be for her benefit. If
      Samoylenko, who was obviously under the influence of Von Koren, should
      refuse the money altogether or make fresh conditions, then he, Laevsky,
      would go off that very evening in a cargo vessel, or even in a
      sailing-boat, to Novy Athon or Novorossiisk, would send from there an
      humiliating telegram, and would stay there till his mother sent him the
      money for the journey.
    

      When he went into Samoylenko’s, he found Von Koren in the
      drawing-room. The zoologist had just arrived for dinner, and, as usual,
      was turning over the album and scrutinising the gentlemen in top-hats and
      the ladies in caps.
    

      “How very unlucky!” thought Laevsky, seeing him. “He may
      be in the way. Good-morning.”
    

      “Good-morning,” answered Von Koren, without looking at him.
    

      “Is Alexandr Daviditch at home?”
    

      “Yes, in the kitchen.”
    

      Laevsky went into the kitchen, but seeing from the door that Samoylenko
      was busy over the salad, he went back into the drawing-room and sat down.
      He always had a feeling of awkwardness in the zoologist’s presence,
      and now he was afraid there would be talk about his attack of hysterics.
      There was more than a minute of silence. Von Koren suddenly raised his
      eyes to Laevsky and asked:
    

      “How do you feel after yesterday?”
    

      “Very well indeed,” said Laevsky, flushing. “It really
      was nothing much. . . .”
    

      “Until yesterday I thought it was only ladies who had hysterics, and
      so at first I thought you had St. Vitus’s dance.”
    

      Laevsky smiled ingratiatingly, and thought:
    

      “How indelicate on his part! He knows quite well how unpleasant it
      is for me. . . .”
    

      “Yes, it was a ridiculous performance,” he said, still
      smiling. “I’ve been laughing over it the whole morning. What’s
      so curious in an attack of hysterics is that you know it is absurd, and
      are laughing at it in your heart, and at the same time you sob. In our
      neurotic age we are the slaves of our nerves; they are our masters and do
      as they like with us. Civilisation has done us a bad turn in that way. . .
      .”
    

      As Laevsky talked, he felt it disagreeable that Von Koren listened to him
      gravely, and looked at him steadily and attentively as though studying
      him; and he was vexed with himself that in spite of his dislike of Von
      Koren, he could not banish the ingratiating smile from his face.
    

      “I must admit, though,” he added, “that there were
      immediate causes for the attack, and quite sufficient ones too. My health
      has been terribly shaky of late. To which one must add boredom, constantly
      being hard up . . . the absence of people and general interests . . . . My
      position is worse than a governor’s.”
    

      “Yes, your position is a hopeless one,” answered Von Koren.
    

      These calm, cold words, implying something between a jeer and an uninvited
      prediction, offended Laevsky. He recalled the zoologist’s eyes the
      evening before, full of mockery and disgust. He was silent for a space and
      then asked, no longer smiling:
    

      “How do you know anything of my position?”
    

      “You were only just speaking of it yourself. Besides, your friends
      take such a warm interest in you, that I am hearing about you all day
      long.”
    

      “What friends? Samoylenko, I suppose?”
    

      “Yes, he too.”
    

      “I would ask Alexandr Daviditch and my friends in general not to
      trouble so much about me.”
    

      “Here is Samoylenko; you had better ask him not to trouble so much
      about you.”
    

      “I don’t understand your tone,” Laevsky muttered,
      suddenly feeling as though he had only just realised that the zoologist
      hated and despised him, and was jeering at him, and was his bitterest and
      most inveterate enemy.
    

      “Keep that tone for some one else,” he said softly, unable to
      speak aloud for the hatred with which his chest and throat were choking,
      as they had been the night before with laughter.
    

      Samoylenko came in in his shirt-sleeves, crimson and perspiring from the
      stifling kitchen.
    

      “Ah, you here?” he said. “Good-morning, my dear boy.
      Have you had dinner? Don’t stand on ceremony. Have you had dinner?”
    

      “Alexandr Daviditch,” said Laevsky, standing up, “though
      I did appeal to you to help me in a private matter, it did not follow that
      I released you from the obligation of discretion and respect for other
      people’s private affairs.”
    

      “What’s this?” asked Samoylenko, in astonishment.
    

      “If you have no money,” Laevsky went on, raising his voice and
      shifting from one foot to the other in his excitement, “don’t
      give it; refuse it. But why spread abroad in every back street that my
      position is hopeless, and all the rest of it? I can’t endure such
      benevolence and friend’s assistance where there’s a
      shilling-worth of talk for a ha’p’orth of help! You can boast
      of your benevolence as much as you please, but no one has given you the
      right to gossip about my private affairs!”
    

      “What private affairs?” asked Samoylenko, puzzled and
      beginning to be angry. “If you’ve come here to be abusive, you
      had better clear out. You can come again afterwards!”
    

      He remembered the rule that when one is angry with one’s neighbour,
      one must begin to count a hundred, and one will grow calm again; and he
      began rapidly counting.
    

      “I beg you not to trouble yourself about me,” Laevsky went on.
      “Don’t pay any attention to me, and whose business is it what
      I do and how I live? Yes, I want to go away. Yes, I get into debt, I
      drink, I am living with another man’s wife, I’m hysterical, I’m
      ordinary. I am not so profound as some people, but whose business is that?
      Respect other people’s privacy.”
    

      “Excuse me, brother,” said Samoylenko, who had counted up to
      thirty-five, “but . . .”
    

      “Respect other people’s individuality!” interrupted
      Laevsky. “This continual gossip about other people’s affairs,
      this sighing and groaning and everlasting prying, this eavesdropping, this
      friendly sympathy . . . damn it all! They lend me money and make
      conditions as though I were a schoolboy! I am treated as the devil knows
      what! I don’t want anything,” shouted Laevsky, staggering with
      excitement and afraid that it might end in another attack of hysterics.
      “I shan’t get away on Saturday, then,” flashed through
      his mind. “I want nothing. All I ask of you is to spare me your
      protecting care. I’m not a boy, and I’m not mad, and I beg you
      to leave off looking after me.”
    

      The deacon came in, and seeing Laevsky pale and gesticulating, addressing
      his strange speech to the portrait of Prince Vorontsov, stood still by the
      door as though petrified.
    

      “This continual prying into my soul,” Laevsky went on, “is
      insulting to my human dignity, and I beg these volunteer detectives to
      give up their spying! Enough!”
    

      “What’s that . . . what did you say?” said Samoylenko,
      who had counted up to a hundred. He turned crimson and went up to Laevsky.
    

      “It’s enough,” said Laevsky, breathing hard and
      snatching up his cap.
    

      “I’m a Russian doctor, a nobleman by birth, and a civil
      councillor,” said Samoylenko emphatically. “I’ve never
      been a spy, and I allow no one to insult me!” he shouted in a
      breaking voice, emphasising the last word. “Hold your tongue!”
    

      The deacon, who had never seen the doctor so majestic, so swelling with
      dignity, so crimson and so ferocious, shut his mouth, ran out into the
      entry and there exploded with laughter.
    

      As though through a fog, Laevsky saw Von Koren get up and, putting his
      hands in his trouser-pockets, stand still in an attitude of expectancy, as
      though waiting to see what would happen. This calm attitude struck Laevsky
      as insolent and insulting to the last degree.
    

      “Kindly take back your words,” shouted Samoylenko.
    

      Laevsky, who did not by now remember what his words were, answered:
    

      “Leave me alone! I ask for nothing. All I ask is that you and German
      upstarts of Jewish origin should let me alone! Or I shall take steps to
      make you! I will fight you!”
    

      “Now we understand,” said Von Koren, coming from behind the
      table. “Mr. Laevsky wants to amuse himself with a duel before he
      goes away. I can give him that pleasure. Mr. Laevsky, I accept your
      challenge.”
    

      “A challenge,” said Laevsky, in a low voice, going up to the
      zoologist and looking with hatred at his swarthy brow and curly hair.
      “A challenge? By all means! I hate you! I hate you!”
    

      “Delighted. To-morrow morning early near Kerbalay’s. I leave
      all details to your taste. And now, clear out!”
    

      “I hate you,” Laevsky said softly, breathing hard. “I
      have hated you a long while! A duel! Yes!”
    

      “Get rid of him, Alexandr Daviditch, or else I’m going,”
      said Von Koren. “He’ll bite me.”
    

      Von Koren’s cool tone calmed the doctor; he seemed suddenly to come
      to himself, to recover his reason; he put both arms round Laevsky’s
      waist, and, leading him away from the zoologist, muttered in a friendly
      voice that shook with emotion:
    

      “My friends . . . dear, good . . . you’ve lost your tempers
      and that’s enough . . . and that’s enough, my friends.”
    

      Hearing his soft, friendly voice, Laevsky felt that something unheard of,
      monstrous, had just happened to him, as though he had been nearly run over
      by a train; he almost burst into tears, waved his hand, and ran out of the
      room.
    

      “To feel that one is hated, to expose oneself before the man who
      hates one, in the most pitiful, contemptible, helpless state. My God, how
      hard it is!” he thought a little while afterwards as he sat in the
      pavilion, feeling as though his body were scarred by the hatred of which
      he had just been the object.
    

      “How coarse it is, my God!”
    

      Cold water with brandy in it revived him. He vividly pictured Von Koren’s
      calm, haughty face; his eyes the day before, his shirt like a rug, his
      voice, his white hand; and heavy, passionate, hungry hatred rankled in his
      breast and clamoured for satisfaction. In his thoughts he felled Von Koren
      to the ground, and trampled him underfoot. He remembered to the minutest
      detail all that had happened, and wondered how he could have smiled
      ingratiatingly to that insignificant man, and how he could care for the
      opinion of wretched petty people whom nobody knew, living in a miserable
      little town which was not, it seemed, even on the map, and of which not
      one decent person in Petersburg had heard. If this wretched little town
      suddenly fell into ruins or caught fire, the telegram with the news would
      be read in Russia with no more interest than an advertisement of the sale
      of second-hand furniture. Whether he killed Von Koren next day or left him
      alive, it would be just the same, equally useless and uninteresting.
      Better to shoot him in the leg or hand, wound him, then laugh at him, and
      let him, like an insect with a broken leg lost in the grass—let him
      be lost with his obscure sufferings in the crowd of insignificant people
      like himself.
    

      Laevsky went to Sheshkovsky, told him all about it, and asked him to be
      his second; then they both went to the superintendent of the postal
      telegraph department, and asked him, too, to be a second, and stayed to
      dinner with him. At dinner there was a great deal of joking and laughing.
      Laevsky made jests at his own expense, saying he hardly knew how to fire
      off a pistol, calling himself a royal archer and William Tell.
    

      “We must give this gentleman a lesson . . .” he said.
    

      After dinner they sat down to cards. Laevsky played, drank wine, and
      thought that duelling was stupid and senseless, as it did not decide the
      question but only complicated it, but that it was sometimes impossible to
      get on without it. In the given case, for instance, one could not, of
      course, bring an action against Von Koren. And this duel was so far good
      in that it made it impossible for Laevsky to remain in the town
      afterwards. He got a little drunk and interested in the game, and felt at
      ease.
    

      But when the sun had set and it grew dark, he was possessed by a feeling
      of uneasiness. It was not fear at the thought of death, because while he
      was dining and playing cards, he had for some reason a confident belief
      that the duel would end in nothing; it was dread at the thought of
      something unknown which was to happen next morning for the first time in
      his life, and dread of the coming night. . . . He knew that the night
      would be long and sleepless, and that he would have to think not only of
      Von Koren and his hatred, but also of the mountain of lies which he had to
      get through, and which he had not strength or ability to dispense with. It
      was as though he had been taken suddenly ill; all at once he lost all
      interest in the cards and in people, grew restless, and began asking them
      to let him go home. He was eager to get into bed, to lie without moving,
      and to prepare his thoughts for the night. Sheshkovsky and the postal
      superintendent saw him home and went on to Von Koren’s to arrange
      about the duel.
    

      Near his lodgings Laevsky met Atchmianov. The young man was breathless and
      excited.
    

      “I am looking for you, Ivan Andreitch,” he said. “I beg
      you to come quickly. . . .”
    

      “Where?”
    

      “Some one wants to see you, some one you don’t know, about
      very important business; he earnestly begs you to come for a minute. He
      wants to speak to you of something. . . . For him it’s a question of
      life and death. . . .” In his excitement Atchmianov spoke in a
      strong Armenian accent.
    

      “Who is it?” asked Laevsky.
    

      “He asked me not to tell you his name.”
    

      “Tell him I’m busy; to-morrow, if he likes. . . .”
    

      “How can you!” Atchmianov was aghast. “He wants to tell
      you something very important for you . . . very important! If you don’t
      come, something dreadful will happen.”
    

      “Strange . . .” muttered Laevsky, unable to understand why
      Atchmianov was so excited and what mysteries there could be in this dull,
      useless little town.
    

      “Strange,” he repeated in hesitation. “Come along,
      though; I don’t care.”
    

      Atchmianov walked rapidly on ahead and Laevsky followed him. They walked
      down a street, then turned into an alley.
    

      “What a bore this is!” said Laevsky.
    

      “One minute, one minute . . . it’s near.”
    

      Near the old rampart they went down a narrow alley between two empty
      enclosures, then they came into a sort of large yard and went towards a
      small house.
    

      “That’s Muridov’s, isn’t it?” asked Laevsky.
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “But why we’ve come by the back yards I don’t
      understand. We might have come by the street; it’s nearer. . . .”
    

      “Never mind, never mind. . . .”
    

      It struck Laevsky as strange, too, that Atchmianov led him to a back
      entrance, and motioned to him as though bidding him go quietly and hold
      his tongue.
    

      “This way, this way . . .” said Atchmianov, cautiously opening
      the door and going into the passage on tiptoe. “Quietly, quietly, I
      beg you . . . they may hear.”
    

      He listened, drew a deep breath and said in a whisper:
    

      “Open that door, and go in . . . don’t be afraid.”
    

      Laevsky, puzzled, opened the door and went into a room with a low ceiling
      and curtained windows.
    

      There was a candle on the table.
    

      “What do you want?” asked some one in the next room. “Is
      it you, Muridov?”
    

      Laevsky turned into that room and saw Kirilin, and beside him Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna.
    

      He didn’t hear what was said to him; he staggered back, and did not
      know how he found himself in the street. His hatred for Von Koren and his
      uneasiness—all had vanished from his soul. As he went home he waved
      his right arm awkwardly and looked carefully at the ground under his feet,
      trying to step where it was smooth. At home in his study he walked
      backwards and forwards, rubbing his hands, and awkwardly shrugging his
      shoulders and neck, as though his jacket and shirt were too tight; then he
      lighted a candle and sat down to the table. . . .
    

      XVI
    

      “The ‘humane studies’ of which you speak will only
      satisfy human thought when, as they advance, they meet the exact sciences
      and progress side by side with them. Whether they will meet under a new
      microscope, or in the monologues of a new Hamlet, or in a new religion, I
      do not know, but I expect the earth will be covered with a crust of ice
      before it comes to pass. Of all humane learning the most durable and
      living is, of course, the teaching of Christ; but look how differently
      even that is interpreted! Some teach that we must love all our neighbours
      but make an exception of soldiers, criminals, and lunatics. They allow the
      first to be killed in war, the second to be isolated or executed, and the
      third they forbid to marry. Other interpreters teach that we must love all
      our neighbours without exception, with no distinction of plus or minus.
      According to their teaching, if a consumptive or a murderer or an
      epileptic asks your daughter in marriage, you must let him have her. If crÃªtins
      go to war against the physically and mentally healthy, don’t defend
      yourselves. This advocacy of love for love’s sake, like art for art’s
      sake, if it could have power, would bring mankind in the long run to
      complete extinction, and so would become the vastest crime that has ever
      been committed upon earth. There are very many interpretations, and since
      there are many of them, serious thought is not satisfied by any one of
      them, and hastens to add its own individual interpretation to the mass.
      For that reason you should never put a question on a philosophical or
      so-called Christian basis; by so doing you only remove the question
      further from solution.”
    

      The deacon listened to the zoologist attentively, thought a little, and
      asked:
    

      “Have the philosophers invented the moral law which is innate in
      every man, or did God create it together with the body?”
    

      “I don’t know. But that law is so universal among all peoples
      and all ages that I fancy we ought to recognise it as organically
      connected with man. It is not invented, but exists and will exist. I don’t
      tell you that one day it will be seen under the microscope, but its
      organic connection is shown, indeed, by evidence: serious affections of
      the brain and all so-called mental diseases, to the best of my belief,
      show themselves first of all in the perversion of the moral law.”
    

      “Good. So then, just as our stomach bids us eat, our moral sense
      bids us love our neighbours. Is that it? But our natural man through
      self-love opposes the voice of conscience and reason, and this gives rise
      to many brain-racking questions. To whom ought we to turn for the solution
      of those questions if you forbid us to put them on the philosophic basis?”
    

      “Turn to what little exact science we have. Trust to evidence and
      the logic of facts. It is true it is but little, but, on the other hand,
      it is less fluid and shifting than philosophy. The moral law, let us
      suppose, demands that you love your neighbour. Well? Love ought to show
      itself in the removal of everything which in one way or another is
      injurious to men and threatens them with danger in the present or in the
      future. Our knowledge and the evidence tells us that the morally and
      physically abnormal are a menace to humanity. If so you must struggle
      against the abnormal; if you are not able to raise them to the normal
      standard you must have strength and ability to render them harmless—that
      is, to destroy them.”
    

      “So love consists in the strong overcoming the weak.”
    

      “Undoubtedly.”
    

      “But you know the strong crucified our Lord Jesus Christ,”
      said the deacon hotly.
    

      “The fact is that those who crucified Him were not the strong but
      the weak. Human culture weakens and strives to nullify the struggle for
      existence and natural selection; hence the rapid advancement of the weak
      and their predominance over the strong. Imagine that you succeeded in
      instilling into bees humanitarian ideas in their crude and elementary
      form. What would come of it? The drones who ought to be killed would
      remain alive, would devour the honey, would corrupt and stifle the bees,
      resulting in the predominance of the weak over the strong and the
      degeneration of the latter. The same process is taking place now with
      humanity; the weak are oppressing the strong. Among savages untouched by
      civilisation the strongest, cleverest, and most moral takes the lead; he
      is the chief and the master. But we civilised men have crucified Christ,
      and we go on crucifying Him, so there is something lacking in us. . . .
      And that something one ought to raise up in ourselves, or there will be no
      end to these errors.”
    

      “But what criterion have you to distinguish the strong from the
      weak?”
    

      “Knowledge and evidence. The tuberculous and the scrofulous are
      recognised by their diseases, and the insane and the immoral by their
      actions.”
    

      “But mistakes may be made!”
    

      “Yes, but it’s no use to be afraid of getting your feet wet
      when you are threatened with the deluge!”
    

      “That’s philosophy,” laughed the deacon.
    

      “Not a bit of it. You are so corrupted by your seminary philosophy
      that you want to see nothing but fog in everything. The abstract studies
      with which your youthful head is stuffed are called abstract just because
      they abstract your minds from what is obvious. Look the devil straight in
      the eye, and if he’s the devil, tell him he’s the devil, and
      don’t go calling to Kant or Hegel for explanations.”
    

      The zoologist paused and went on:
    

      “Twice two’s four, and a stone’s a stone. Here to-morrow
      we have a duel. You and I will say it’s stupid and absurd, that the
      duel is out of date, that there is no real difference between the
      aristocratic duel and the drunken brawl in the pot-house, and yet we shall
      not stop, we shall go there and fight. So there is some force stronger
      than our reasoning. We shout that war is plunder, robbery, atrocity,
      fratricide; we cannot look upon blood without fainting; but the French or
      the Germans have only to insult us for us to feel at once an exaltation of
      spirit; in the most genuine way we shout ‘Hurrah!’ and rush to
      attack the foe. You will invoke the blessing of God on our weapons, and
      our valour will arouse universal and general enthusiasm. Again it follows
      that there is a force, if not higher, at any rate stronger, than us and
      our philosophy. We can no more stop it than that cloud which is moving
      upwards over the sea. Don’t be hypocritical, don’t make a long
      nose at it on the sly; and don’t say, ‘Ah, old-fashioned,
      stupid! Ah, it’s inconsistent with Scripture!’ but look it
      straight in the face, recognise its rational lawfulness, and when, for
      instance, it wants to destroy a rotten, scrofulous, corrupt race, don’t
      hinder it with your pilules and misunderstood quotations from the Gospel.
      Leskov has a story of a conscientious Danila who found a leper outside the
      town, and fed and warmed him in the name of love and of Christ. If that
      Danila had really loved humanity, he would have dragged the leper as far
      as possible from the town, and would have flung him in a pit, and would
      have gone to save the healthy. Christ, I hope, taught us a rational,
      intelligent, practical love.”
    

      “What a fellow you are!” laughed the deacon. “You don’t
      believe in Christ. Why do you mention His name so often?”
    

      “Yes, I do believe in Him. Only, of course, in my own way, not in
      yours. Oh, deacon, deacon!” laughed the zoologist; he put his arm
      round the deacon’s waist, and said gaily: “Well? Are you
      coming with us to the duel to-morrow?”
    

      “My orders don’t allow it, or else I should come.”
    

      “What do you mean by ‘orders’?”
    

      “I have been consecrated. I am in a state of grace.”
    

      “Oh, deacon, deacon,” repeated Von Koren, laughing, “I
      love talking to you.”
    

      “You say you have faith,” said the deacon. “What sort of
      faith is it? Why, I have an uncle, a priest, and he believes so that when
      in time of drought he goes out into the fields to pray for rain, he takes
      his umbrella and leather overcoat for fear of getting wet through on his
      way home. That’s faith! When he speaks of Christ, his face is full
      of radiance, and all the peasants, men and women, weep floods of tears. He
      would stop that cloud and put all those forces you talk about to flight.
      Yes . . . faith moves mountains.”
    

      The deacon laughed and slapped the zoologist on the shoulder.
    

      “Yes . . .” he went on; “here you are teaching all the
      time, fathoming the depths of the ocean, dividing the weak and the strong,
      writing books and challenging to duels—and everything remains as it
      is; but, behold! some feeble old man will mutter just one word with a holy
      spirit, or a new Mahomet, with a sword, will gallop from Arabia, and
      everything will be topsy-turvy, and in Europe not one stone will be left
      standing upon another.”
    

      “Well, deacon, that’s on the knees of the gods.”
    

      “Faith without works is dead, but works without faith are worse
      still—mere waste of time and nothing more.”
    

      The doctor came into sight on the sea-front. He saw the deacon and the
      zoologist, and went up to them.
    

      “I believe everything is ready,” he said, breathing hard.
      “Govorovsky and Boyko will be the seconds. They will start at five o’clock
      in the morning. How it has clouded over,” he said, looking at the
      sky. “One can see nothing; there will be rain directly.”
    

      “I hope you are coming with us?” said the zoologist.
    

      “No, God preserve me; I’m worried enough as it is. Ustimovitch
      is going instead of me. I’ve spoken to him already.”
    

      Far over the sea was a flash of lightning, followed by a hollow roll of
      thunder.
    

      “How stifling it is before a storm!” said Von Koren. “I
      bet you’ve been to Laevsky already and have been weeping on his
      bosom.”
    

      “Why should I go to him?” answered the doctor in confusion.
      “What next?”
    

      Before sunset he had walked several times along the boulevard and the
      street in the hope of meeting Laevsky. He was ashamed of his hastiness and
      the sudden outburst of friendliness which had followed it. He wanted to
      apologise to Laevsky in a joking tone, to give him a good talking to, to
      soothe him and to tell him that the duel was a survival of mediÃ¦val
      barbarism, but that Providence itself had brought them to the duel as a
      means of reconciliation; that the next day, both being splendid and highly
      intelligent people, they would, after exchanging shots, appreciate each
      other’s noble qualities and would become friends. But he could not
      come across Laevsky.
    

      “What should I go and see him for?” repeated Samoylenko.
      “I did not insult him; he insulted me. Tell me, please, why he
      attacked me. What harm had I done him? I go into the drawing-room, and,
      all of a sudden, without the least provocation: ‘Spy!’ There’s
      a nice thing! Tell me, how did it begin? What did you say to him?”
    

      “I told him his position was hopeless. And I was right. It is only
      honest men or scoundrels who can find an escape from any position, but one
      who wants to be at the same time an honest man and a scoundrel —it
      is a hopeless position. But it’s eleven o’clock, gentlemen,
      and we have to be up early to-morrow.”
    

      There was a sudden gust of wind; it blew up the dust on the sea-front,
      whirled it round in eddies, with a howl that drowned the roar of the sea.
    

      “A squall,” said the deacon. “We must go in, our eyes
      are getting full of dust.”
    

      As they went, Samoylenko sighed and, holding his hat, said:
    

      “I suppose I shan’t sleep to-night.”
    

      “Don’t you agitate yourself,” laughed the zoologist.
      “You can set your mind at rest; the duel will end in nothing.
      Laevsky will magnanimously fire into the air—he can do nothing else;
      and I daresay I shall not fire at all. To be arrested and lose my time on
      Laevsky’s account—the game’s not worth the candle. By
      the way, what is the punishment for duelling?”
    

      “Arrest, and in the case of the death of your opponent a maximum of
      three years’ imprisonment in the fortress.”
    

      “The fortress of St. Peter and St. Paul?”
    

      “No, in a military fortress, I believe.”
    

      “Though this fine gentleman ought to have a lesson!”
    

      Behind them on the sea, there was a flash of lightning, which for an
      instant lighted up the roofs of the houses and the mountains. The friends
      parted near the boulevard. When the doctor disappeared in the darkness and
      his steps had died away, Von Koren shouted to him:
    

      “I only hope the weather won’t interfere with us to-morrow!”
    

      “Very likely it will! Please God it may!”
    

      “Good-night!”
    

      “What about the night? What do you say?”
    

      In the roar of the wind and the sea and the crashes of thunder, it was
      difficult to hear.
    

      “It’s nothing,” shouted the zoologist, and hurried home.
    

      XVII
    

             “Upon my mind, weighed down with woe,
              Crowd thoughts, a heavy multitude:
              In silence memory unfolds
              Her long, long scroll before my eyes.
              Loathing and shuddering I curse
              And bitterly lament in vain,
              And bitter though the tears I weep
              I do not wash those lines away.”

                                      PUSHKIN.


      Whether they killed him next morning, or mocked at him—that is, left
      him his life—he was ruined, anyway. Whether this disgraced woman
      killed herself in her shame and despair, or dragged on her pitiful
      existence, she was ruined anyway.
    

      So thought Laevsky as he sat at the table late in the evening, still
      rubbing his hands. The windows suddenly blew open with a bang; a violent
      gust of wind burst into the room, and the papers fluttered from the table.
      Laevsky closed the windows and bent down to pick up the papers. He was
      aware of something new in his body, a sort of awkwardness he had not felt
      before, and his movements were strange to him. He moved timidly, jerking
      with his elbows and shrugging his shoulders; and when he sat down to the
      table again, he again began rubbing his hands. His body had lost its
      suppleness.
    

      On the eve of death one ought to write to one’s nearest relation.
      Laevsky thought of this. He took a pen and wrote with a tremulous hand:
    

      “Mother!”
    

      He wanted to write to beg his mother, for the sake of the merciful God in
      whom she believed, that she would give shelter and bring a little warmth
      and kindness into the life of the unhappy woman who, by his doing, had
      been disgraced and was in solitude, poverty, and weakness, that she would
      forgive and forget everything, everything, everything, and by her
      sacrifice atone to some extent for her son’s terrible sin. But he
      remembered how his mother, a stout, heavily-built old woman in a lace cap,
      used to go out into the garden in the morning, followed by her companion
      with the lap-dog; how she used to shout in a peremptory way to the
      gardener and the servants, and how proud and haughty her face was—he
      remembered all this and scratched out the word he had written.
    

      There was a vivid flash of lightning at all three windows, and it was
      followed by a prolonged, deafening roll of thunder, beginning with a
      hollow rumble and ending with a crash so violent that all the window-panes
      rattled. Laevsky got up, went to the window, and pressed his forehead
      against the pane. There was a fierce, magnificent storm. On the horizon
      lightning-flashes were flung in white streams from the storm-clouds into
      the sea, lighting up the high, dark waves over the far-away expanse. And
      to right and to left, and, no doubt, over the house too, the lightning
      flashed.
    

      “The storm!” whispered Laevsky; he had a longing to pray to
      some one or to something, if only to the lightning or the storm-clouds.
      “Dear storm!”
    

      He remembered how as a boy he used to run out into the garden without a
      hat on when there was a storm, and how two fair-haired girls with blue
      eyes used to run after him, and how they got wet through with the rain;
      they laughed with delight, but when there was a loud peal of thunder, the
      girls used to nestle up to the boy confidingly, while he crossed himself
      and made haste to repeat: “Holy, holy, holy. . . .” Oh, where
      had they vanished to! In what sea were they drowned, those dawning days of
      pure, fair life? He had no fear of the storm, no love of nature now; he
      had no God. All the confiding girls he had ever known had by now been
      ruined by him and those like him. All his life he had not planted one tree
      in his own garden, nor grown one blade of grass; and living among the
      living, he had not saved one fly; he had done nothing but destroy and
      ruin, and lie, lie. . . .
    

      “What in my past was not vice?” he asked himself, trying to
      clutch at some bright memory as a man falling down a precipice clutches at
      the bushes.
    

      School? The university? But that was a sham. He had neglected his work and
      forgotten what he had learnt. The service of his country? That, too, was a
      sham, for he did nothing in the Service, took a salary for doing nothing,
      and it was an abominable swindling of the State for which one was not
      punished.
    

      He had no craving for truth, and had not sought it; spellbound by vice and
      lying, his conscience had slept or been silent. Like a stranger, like an
      alien from another planet, he had taken no part in the common life of men,
      had been indifferent to their sufferings, their ideas, their religion,
      their sciences, their strivings, and their struggles. He had not said one
      good word, not written one line that was not useless and vulgar; he had
      not done his fellows one ha’p’orth of service, but had eaten
      their bread, drunk their wine, seduced their wives, lived on their
      thoughts, and to justify his contemptible, parasitic life in their eyes
      and in his own, he had always tried to assume an air of being higher and
      better than they. Lies, lies, lies. . . .
    

      He vividly remembered what he had seen that evening at Muridov’s,
      and he was in an insufferable anguish of loathing and misery. Kirilin and
      Atchmianov were loathsome, but they were only continuing what he had
      begun; they were his accomplices and his disciples. This young weak woman
      had trusted him more than a brother, and he had deprived her of her
      husband, of her friends and of her country, and had brought her here—to
      the heat, to fever, and to boredom; and from day to day she was bound to
      reflect, like a mirror, his idleness, his viciousness and falsity—and
      that was all she had had to fill her weak, listless, pitiable life. Then
      he had grown sick of her, had begun to hate her, but had not had the pluck
      to abandon her, and he had tried to entangle her more and more closely in
      a web of lies. . . . These men had done the rest.
    

      Laevsky sat at the table, then got up and went to the window; at one
      minute he put out the candle and then he lighted it again. He cursed
      himself aloud, wept and wailed, and asked forgiveness; several times he
      ran to the table in despair, and wrote:
    

      “Mother!”
    

      Except his mother, he had no relations or near friends; but how could his
      mother help him? And where was she? He had an impulse to run to Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, to fall at her feet, to kiss her hands and feet, to beg her
      forgiveness; but she was his victim, and he was afraid of her as though
      she were dead.
    

      “My life is ruined,” he repeated, rubbing his hands. “Why
      am I still alive, my God! . . .”
    

      He had cast out of heaven his dim star; it had fallen, and its track was
      lost in the darkness of night. It would never return to the sky again,
      because life was given only once and never came a second time. If he could
      have turned back the days and years of the past, he would have replaced
      the falsity with truth, the idleness with work, the boredom with
      happiness; he would have given back purity to those whom he had robbed of
      it. He would have found God and goodness, but that was as impossible as to
      put back the fallen star into the sky, and because it was impossible he
      was in despair.
    

      When the storm was over, he sat by the open window and thought calmly of
      what was before him. Von Koren would most likely kill him. The man’s
      clear, cold theory of life justified the destruction of the rotten and the
      useless; if it changed at the crucial moment, it would be the hatred and
      the repugnance that Laevsky inspired in him that would save him. If he
      missed his aim or, in mockery of his hated opponent, only wounded him, or
      fired in the air, what could he do then? Where could he go?
    

      “Go to Petersburg?” Laevsky asked himself. But that would mean
      beginning over again the old life which he cursed. And the man who seeks
      salvation in change of place like a migrating bird would find nothing
      anywhere, for all the world is alike to him. Seek salvation in men? In
      whom and how? Samoylenko’s kindness and generosity could no more
      save him than the deacon’s laughter or Von Koren’s hatred. He
      must look for salvation in himself alone, and if there were no finding it,
      why waste time? He must kill himself, that was all. . . .
    

      He heard the sound of a carriage. It was getting light. The carriage
      passed by, turned, and crunching on the wet sand, stopped near the house.
      There were two men in the carriage.
    

      “Wait a minute; I’m coming directly,” Laevsky said to
      them out of the window. “I’m not asleep. Surely it’s not
      time yet?”
    

      “Yes, it’s four o’clock. By the time we get there . . .
      .”
    

      Laevsky put on his overcoat and cap, put some cigarettes in his pocket,
      and stood still hesitating. He felt as though there was something else he
      must do. In the street the seconds talked in low voices and the horses
      snorted, and this sound in the damp, early morning, when everybody was
      asleep and light was hardly dawning in the sky, filled Laevsky’s
      soul with a disconsolate feeling which was like a presentiment of evil. He
      stood for a little, hesitating, and went into the bedroom.
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was lying stretched out on the bed, wrapped from head
      to foot in a rug. She did not stir, and her whole appearance, especially
      her head, suggested an Egyptian mummy. Looking at her in silence, Laevsky
      mentally asked her forgiveness, and thought that if the heavens were not
      empty and there really were a God, then He would save her; if there were
      no God, then she had better perish—there was nothing for her to live
      for.
    

      All at once she jumped up, and sat up in bed. Lifting her pale face and
      looking with horror at Laevsky, she asked:
    

      “Is it you? Is the storm over?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      She remembered; put both hands to her head and shuddered all over.
    

      “How miserable I am!” she said. “If only you knew how
      miserable I am! I expected,” she went on, half closing her eyes,
      “that you would kill me or turn me out of the house into the rain
      and storm, but you delay . . . delay . . .”
    

      Warmly and impulsively he put his arms round her and covered her knees and
      hands with kisses. Then when she muttered something and shuddered with the
      thought of the past, he stroked her hair, and looking into her face,
      realised that this unhappy, sinful woman was the one creature near and
      dear to him, whom no one could replace.
    

      When he went out of the house and got into the carriage he wanted to
      return home alive.
    

      XVIII
    

      The deacon got up, dressed, took his thick, gnarled stick and slipped
      quietly out of the house. It was dark, and for the first minute when he
      went into the street, he could not even see his white stick. There was not
      a single star in the sky, and it looked as though there would be rain
      again. There was a smell of wet sand and sea.
    

      “It’s to be hoped that the mountaineers won’t attack us,”
      thought the deacon, hearing the tap of the stick on the pavement, and
      noticing how loud and lonely the taps sounded in the stillness of the
      night.
    

      When he got out of town, he began to see both the road and his stick. Here
      and there in the black sky there were dark cloudy patches, and soon a star
      peeped out and timidly bGlinked its one eye. The deacon walked along the
      high rocky coast and did not see the sea; it was slumbering below, and its
      unseen waves broke languidly and heavily on the shore, as though sighing
      “Ouf!” and how slowly! One wave broke—the deacon had
      time to count eight steps; then another broke, and six steps; later a
      third. As before, nothing could be seen, and in the darkness one could
      hear the languid, drowsy drone of the sea. One could hear the infinitely
      faraway, inconceivable time when God moved above chaos.
    

      The deacon felt uncanny. He hoped God would not punish him for keeping
      company with infidels, and even going to look at their duels. The duel
      would be nonsensical, bloodless, absurd, but however that might be, it was
      a heathen spectacle, and it was altogether unseemly for an ecclesiastical
      person to be present at it. He stopped and wondered—should he go
      back? But an intense, restless curiosity triumphed over his doubts, and he
      went on.
    

      “Though they are infidels they are good people, and will be saved,”
      he assured himself. “They are sure to be saved,” he said
      aloud, lighting a cigarette.
    

      By what standard must one measure men’s qualities, to judge rightly
      of them? The deacon remembered his enemy, the inspector of the clerical
      school, who believed in God, lived in chastity, and did not fight duels;
      but he used to feed the deacon on bread with sand in it, and on one
      occasion almost pulled off the deacon’s ear. If human life was so
      artlessly constructed that every one respected this cruel and dishonest
      inspector who stole the Government flour, and his health and salvation
      were prayed for in the schools, was it just to shun such men as Von Koren
      and Laevsky, simply because they were unbelievers? The deacon was weighing
      this question, but he recalled how absurd Samoylenko had looked yesterday,
      and that broke the thread of his ideas. What fun they would have next day!
      The deacon imagined how he would sit under a bush and look on, and when
      Von Koren began boasting next day at dinner, he, the deacon, would begin
      laughing and telling him all the details of the duel.
    

      “How do you know all about it?” the zoologist would ask.
    

      “Well, there you are! I stayed at home, but I know all about it.”
    

      It would be nice to write a comic description of the duel. His
      father-in-law would read it and laugh. A good story, told or written, was
      more than meat and drink to his father-in-law.
    

      The valley of the Yellow River opened before him. The stream was broader
      and fiercer for the rain, and instead of murmuring as before, it was
      raging. It began to get light. The grey, dingy morning, and the clouds
      racing towards the west to overtake the storm-clouds, the mountains girt
      with mist, and the wet trees, all struck the deacon as ugly and sinister.
      He washed at the brook, repeated his morning prayer, and felt a longing
      for tea and hot rolls, with sour cream, which were served every morning at
      his father-in-law’s. He remembered his wife and the “Days past
      Recall,” which she played on the piano. What sort of woman was she?
      His wife had been introduced, betrothed, and married to him all in one
      week: he had lived with her less than a month when he was ordered here, so
      that he had not had time to find out what she was like. All the same, he
      rather missed her.
    

      “I must write her a nice letter . . .” he thought. The flag on
      the duhan hung limp, soaked by the rain, and the duhan
      itself with its wet roof seemed darker and lower than it had been before.
      Near the door was standing a cart; Kerbalay, with two mountaineers and a
      young Tatar woman in trousers—no doubt Kerbalay’s wife or
      daughter—were bringing sacks of something out of the duhan,
      and putting them on maize straw in the cart.
    

      Near the cart stood a pair of asses hanging their heads. When they had put
      in all the sacks, the mountaineers and the Tatar woman began covering them
      over with straw, while Kerbalay began hurriedly harnessing the asses.
    

      “Smuggling, perhaps,” thought the deacon.
    

      Here was the fallen tree with the dried pine-needles, here was the
      blackened patch from the fire. He remembered the picnic and all its
      incidents, the fire, the singing of the mountaineers, his sweet dreams of
      becoming a bishop, and of the Church procession. . . . The Black River had
      grown blacker and broader with the rain. The deacon walked cautiously over
      the narrow bridge, which by now was reached by the topmost crests of the
      dirty water, and went up through the little copse to the drying-shed.
    

      “A splendid head,” he thought, stretching himself on the
      straw, and thinking of Von Koren. “A fine head—God grant him
      health; only there is cruelty in him. . . .”
    

      Why did he hate Laevsky and Laevsky hate him? Why were they going to fight
      a duel? If from their childhood they had known poverty as the deacon had;
      if they had been brought up among ignorant, hard-hearted, grasping, coarse
      and ill-mannered people who grudged you a crust of bread, who spat on the
      floor and hiccoughed at dinner and at prayers; if they had not been spoilt
      from childhood by the pleasant surroundings and the select circle of
      friends they lived in—how they would have rushed at each other, how
      readily they would have overlooked each other’s shortcomings and
      would have prized each other’s strong points! Why, how few even
      outwardly decent people there were in the world! It was true that Laevsky
      was flighty, dissipated, queer, but he did not steal, did not spit loudly
      on the floor; he did not abuse his wife and say, “You’ll eat
      till you burst, but you don’t want to work;” he would not beat
      a child with reins, or give his servants stinking meat to eat—
      surely this was reason enough to be indulgent to him? Besides, he was the
      chief sufferer from his failings, like a sick man from his sores. Instead
      of being led by boredom and some sort of misunderstanding to look for
      degeneracy, extinction, heredity, and other such incomprehensible things
      in each other, would they not do better to stoop a little lower and turn
      their hatred and anger where whole streets resounded with moanings from
      coarse ignorance, greed, scolding, impurity, swearing, the shrieks of
      women. . . .
    

      The sound of a carriage interrupted the deacon’s thoughts. He
      glanced out of the door and saw a carriage and in it three persons:
      Laevsky, Sheshkovsky, and the superintendent of the post-office.
    

      “Stop!” said Sheshkovsky.
    

      All three got out of the carriage and looked at one another.
    

      “They are not here yet,” said Sheshkovsky, shaking the mud
      off. “Well? Till the show begins, let us go and find a suitable
      spot; there’s not room to turn round here.”
    

      They went further up the river and soon vanished from sight. The Tatar
      driver sat in the carriage with his head resting on his shoulder and fell
      asleep. After waiting ten minutes the deacon came out of the drying-shed,
      and taking off his black hat that he might not be noticed, he began
      threading his way among the bushes and strips of maize along the bank,
      crouching and looking about him. The grass and maize were wet, and big
      drops fell on his head from the trees and bushes. “Disgraceful!”
      he muttered, picking up his wet and muddy skirt. “Had I realised it,
      I would not have come.”
    

      Soon he heard voices and caught sight of them. Laevsky was walking rapidly
      to and fro in the small glade with bowed back and hands thrust in his
      sleeves; his seconds were standing at the water’s edge, rolling
      cigarettes.
    

      “Strange,” thought the deacon, not recognising Laevsky’s
      walk; “he looks like an old man. . . .”
    

      “How rude it is of them!” said the superintendent of the
      post-office, looking at his watch. “It may be learned manners to be
      late, but to my thinking it’s hoggish.”
    

      Sheshkovsky, a stout man with a black beard, listened and said:
    

      “They’re coming!”
    

      XIX
    

      “It’s the first time in my life I’ve seen it! How
      glorious!” said Von Koren, pointing to the glade and stretching out
      his hands to the east. “Look: green rays!”
    

      In the east behind the mountains rose two green streaks of light, and it
      really was beautiful. The sun was rising.
    

      “Good-morning!” the zoologist went on, nodding to Laevsky’s
      seconds. “I’m not late, am I?”
    

      He was followed by his seconds, Boyko and Govorovsky, two very young
      officers of the same height, wearing white tunics, and Ustimovitch, the
      thin, unsociable doctor; in one hand he had a bag of some sort, and in the
      other hand, as usual, a cane which he held behind him. Laying the bag on
      the ground and greeting no one, he put the other hand, too, behind his
      back and began pacing up and down the glade.
    

      Laevsky felt the exhaustion and awkwardness of a man who is soon perhaps
      to die, and is for that reason an object of general attention. He wanted
      to be killed as soon as possible or taken home. He saw the sunrise now for
      the first time in his life; the early morning, the green rays of light,
      the dampness, and the men in wet boots, seemed to him to have nothing to
      do with his life, to be superfluous and embarrassing. All this had no
      connection with the night he had been through, with his thoughts and his
      feeling of guilt, and so he would have gladly gone away without waiting
      for the duel.
    

      Von Koren was noticeably excited and tried to conceal it, pretending that
      he was more interested in the green light than anything. The seconds were
      confused, and looked at one another as though wondering why they were here
      and what they were to do.
    

      “I imagine, gentlemen, there is no need for us to go further,”
      said Sheshkovsky. “This place will do.”
    

      “Yes, of course,” Von Koren agreed.
    

      A silence followed. Ustimovitch, pacing to and fro, suddenly turned
      sharply to Laevsky and said in a low voice, breathing into his face:
    

      “They have very likely not told you my terms yet. Each side is to
      pay me fifteen roubles, and in the case of the death of one party, the
      survivor is to pay thirty.”
    

      Laevsky was already acquainted with the man, but now for the first time he
      had a distinct view of his lustreless eyes, his stiff moustaches, and
      wasted, consumptive neck; he was a money-grubber, not a doctor; his breath
      had an unpleasant smell of beef.
    

      “What people there are in the world!” thought Laevsky, and
      answered: “Very good.”
    

      The doctor nodded and began pacing to and fro again, and it was evident he
      did not need the money at all, but simply asked for it from hatred. Every
      one felt it was time to begin, or to end what had been begun, but instead
      of beginning or ending, they stood about, moved to and fro and smoked. The
      young officers, who were present at a duel for the first time in their
      lives, and even now hardly believed in this civilian and, to their
      thinking, unnecessary duel, looked critically at their tunics and stroked
      their sleeves. Sheshkovsky went up to them and said softly: “Gentlemen,
      we must use every effort to prevent this duel; they ought to be
      reconciled.”
    

      He flushed crimson and added:
    

      “Kirilin was at my rooms last night complaining that Laevsky had
      found him with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and all that sort of thing.”
    

      “Yes, we know that too,” said Boyko.
    

      “Well, you see, then . . . Laevsky’s hands are trembling and
      all that sort of thing . . . he can scarcely hold a pistol now. To fight
      with him is as inhuman as to fight a man who is drunk or who has typhoid.
      If a reconciliation cannot be arranged, we ought to put off the duel,
      gentlemen, or something. . . . It’s such a sickening business, I can’t
      bear to see it.”
    

      “Talk to Von Koren.”
    

      “I don’t know the rules of duelling, damnation take them, and
      I don’t want to either; perhaps he’ll imagine Laevsky funks it
      and has sent me to him, but he can think what he likes—I’ll
      speak to him.”
    

      Sheshkovsky hesitatingly walked up to Von Koren with a slight limp, as
      though his leg had gone to sleep; and as he went towards him, clearing his
      throat, his whole figure was a picture of indolence.
    

      “There’s something I must say to you, sir,” he began,
      carefully scrutinising the flowers on the zoologist’s shirt. “It’s
      confidential. I don’t know the rules of duelling, damnation take
      them, and I don’t want to, and I look on the matter not as a second
      and that sort of thing, but as a man, and that’s all about it.”
    

      “Yes. Well?”
    

      “When seconds suggest reconciliation they are usually not listened
      to; it is looked upon as a formality. Amour propre and all that.
      But I humbly beg you to look carefully at Ivan Andreitch. He’s not
      in a normal state, so to speak, to-day—not in his right mind, and a
      pitiable object. He has had a misfortune. I can’t endure gossip. . .
      .”
    

      Sheshkovsky flushed crimson and looked round.
    

      “But in view of the duel, I think it necessary to inform you,
      Laevsky found his madam last night at Muridov’s with . . . another
      gentleman.”
    

      “How disgusting!” muttered the zoologist; he turned pale,
      frowned, and spat loudly. “Tfoo!”
    

      His lower lip quivered, he walked away from Sheshkovsky, unwilling to hear
      more, and as though he had accidentally tasted something bitter, spat
      loudly again, and for the first time that morning looked with hatred at
      Laevsky. His excitement and awkwardness passed off; he tossed his head and
      said aloud:
    

      “Gentlemen, what are we waiting for, I should like to know? Why don’t
      we begin?”
    

      Sheshkovsky glanced at the officers and shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “Gentlemen,” he said aloud, addressing no one in particular.
      “Gentlemen, we propose that you should be reconciled.”
    

      “Let us make haste and get the formalities over,” said Von
      Koren. “Reconciliation has been discussed already. What is the next
      formality? Make haste, gentlemen, time won’t wait for us.”
    

      “But we insist on reconciliation all the same,” said
      Sheshkovsky in a guilty voice, as a man compelled to interfere in another
      man’s business; he flushed, laid his hand on his heart, and went on:
      “Gentlemen, we see no grounds for associating the offence with the
      duel. There’s nothing in common between duelling and offences
      against one another of which we are sometimes guilty through human
      weakness. You are university men and men of culture, and no doubt you see
      in the duel nothing but a foolish and out-of-date formality, and all that
      sort of thing. That’s how we look at it ourselves, or we shouldn’t
      have come, for we cannot allow that in our presence men should fire at one
      another, and all that.” Sheshkovsky wiped the perspiration off his
      face and went on: “Make an end to your misunderstanding, gentlemen;
      shake hands, and let us go home and drink to peace. Upon my honour,
      gentlemen!”
    

      Von Koren did not speak. Laevsky, seeing that they were looking at him,
      said:
    

      “I have nothing against Nikolay Vassilitch; if he considers I’m
      to blame, I’m ready to apologise to him.”
    

      Von Koren was offended.
    

      “It is evident, gentlemen,” he said, “you want Mr.
      Laevsky to return home a magnanimous and chivalrous figure, but I cannot
      give you and him that satisfaction. And there was no need to get up early
      and drive eight miles out of town simply to drink to peace, to have
      breakfast, and to explain to me that the duel is an out-of-date formality.
      A duel is a duel, and there is no need to make it more false and stupid
      than it is in reality. I want to fight!”
    

      A silence followed. Boyko took a pair of pistols out of a box; one was
      given to Von Koren and one to Laevsky, and then there followed a
      difficulty which afforded a brief amusement to the zoologist and the
      seconds. It appeared that of all the people present not one had ever in
      his life been at a duel, and no one knew precisely how they ought to
      stand, and what the seconds ought to say and do. But then Boyko remembered
      and began, with a smile, to explain.
    

      “Gentlemen, who remembers the description in Lermontov?” asked
      Von Koren, laughing. “In Turgenev, too, Bazarov had a duel with some
      one. . . .”
    

      “There’s no need to remember,” said Ustimovitch
      impatiently. “Measure the distance, that’s all.”
    

      And he took three steps as though to show how to measure it. Boyko counted
      out the steps while his companion drew his sabre and scratched the earth
      at the extreme points to mark the barrier. In complete silence the
      opponents took their places.
    

      “Moles,” the deacon thought, sitting in the bushes.
    

      Sheshkovsky said something, Boyko explained something again, but Laevsky
      did not hear—or rather heard, but did not understand. He cocked his
      pistol when the time came to do so, and raised the cold, heavy weapon with
      the barrel upwards. He forgot to unbutton his overcoat, and it felt very
      tight over his shoulder and under his arm, and his arm rose as awkwardly
      as though the sleeve had been cut out of tin. He remembered the hatred he
      had felt the night before for the swarthy brow and curly hair, and felt
      that even yesterday at the moment of intense hatred and anger he could not
      have shot a man. Fearing that the bullet might somehow hit Von Koren by
      accident, he raised the pistol higher and higher, and felt that this too
      obvious magnanimity was indelicate and anything but magnanimous, but he
      did not know how else to do and could do nothing else. Looking at the
      pale, ironically smiling face of Von Koren, who evidently had been
      convinced from the beginning that his opponent would fire in the air,
      Laevsky thought that, thank God, everything would be over directly, and
      all that he had to do was to press the trigger rather hard. . . .
    

      He felt a violent shock on the shoulder; there was the sound of a shot and
      an answering echo in the mountains: ping-ting!
    

      Von Koren cocked his pistol and looked at Ustimovitch, who was pacing as
      before with his hands behind his back, taking no notice of any one.
    

      “Doctor,” said the zoologist, “be so good as not to move
      to and fro like a pendulum. You make me dizzy.”
    

      The doctor stood still. Von Koren began to take aim at Laevsky.
    

      “It’s all over!” thought Laevsky.
    

      The barrel of the pistol aimed straight at his face, the expression of
      hatred and contempt in Von Koren’s attitude and whole figure, and
      the murder just about to be committed by a decent man in broad daylight,
      in the presence of decent men, and the stillness and the unknown force
      that compelled Laevsky to stand still and not to run —how mysterious
      it all was, how incomprehensible and terrible!
    

      The moment while Von Koren was taking aim seemed to Laevsky longer than a
      night: he glanced imploringly at the seconds; they were pale and did not
      stir.
    

      “Make haste and fire,” thought Laevsky, and felt that his
      pale, quivering, and pitiful face must arouse even greater hatred in Von
      Koren.
    

      “I’ll kill him directly,” thought Von Koren, aiming at
      his forehead, with his finger already on the catch. “Yes, of course
      I’ll kill him.”
    

      “He’ll kill him!” A despairing shout was suddenly heard
      somewhere very close at hand.
    

      A shot rang out at once. Seeing that Laevsky remained standing where he
      was and did not fall, they all looked in the direction from which the
      shout had come, and saw the deacon. With pale face and wet hair sticking
      to his forehead and his cheeks, wet through and muddy, he was standing in
      the maize on the further bank, smiling rather queerly and waving his wet
      hat. Sheshkovsky laughed with joy, burst into tears, and moved away. . . .
    

      XX
    

      A little while afterwards, Von Koren and the deacon met near the little
      bridge. The deacon was excited; he breathed hard, and avoided looking in
      people’s faces. He felt ashamed both of his terror and his muddy,
      wet garments.
    

      “I thought you meant to kill him . . .” he muttered. “How
      contrary to human nature it is! How utterly unnatural it is!”
    

      “But how did you come here?” asked the zoologist.
    

      “Don’t ask,” said the deacon, waving his hand. “The
      evil one tempted me, saying: ‘Go, go. . . .’ So I went and
      almost died of fright in the maize. But now, thank God, thank God. . . . I
      am awfully pleased with you,” muttered the deacon. “Old
      Grandad Tarantula will be glad . . . . It’s funny, it’s too
      funny! Only I beg of you most earnestly don’t tell anybody I was
      there, or I may get into hot water with the authorities. They will say:
      ‘The deacon was a second.’”
    

      “Gentlemen,” said Von Koren, “the deacon asks you not to
      tell any one you’ve seen him here. He might get into trouble.”
    

      “How contrary to human nature it is!” sighed the deacon.
      “Excuse my saying so, but your face was so dreadful that I thought
      you were going to kill him.”
    

      “I was very much tempted to put an end to that scoundrel,”
      said Von Koren, “but you shouted close by, and I missed my aim. The
      whole procedure is revolting to any one who is not used to it, and it has
      exhausted me, deacon. I feel awfully tired. Come along. . . .”
    

      “No, you must let me walk back. I must get dry, for I am wet and
      cold.”
    

      “Well, as you like,” said the zoologist, in a weary tone,
      feeling dispirited, and, getting into the carriage, he closed his eyes.
      “As you like. . . .”
    

      While they were moving about the carriages and taking their seats,
      Kerbalay stood in the road, and, laying his hands on his stomach, he bowed
      low, showing his teeth; he imagined that the gentry had come to enjoy the
      beauties of nature and drink tea, and could not understand why they were
      getting into the carriages. The party set off in complete silence and only
      the deacon was left by the duhan.
    

      “Come to the duhan, drink tea,” he said to Kerbalay.
      “Me wants to eat.”
    

      Kerbalay spoke good Russian, but the deacon imagined that the Tatar would
      understand him better if he talked to him in broken Russian. “Cook
      omelette, give cheese. . . .”
    

      “Come, come, father,” said Kerbalay, bowing. “I’ll
      give you everything . . . . I’ve cheese and wine. . . . Eat what you
      like.”
    

      “What is ‘God’ in Tatar?” asked the deacon, going
      into the duhan.
    

      “Your God and my God are the same,” said Kerbalay, not
      understanding him. “God is the same for all men, only men are
      different. Some are Russian, some are Turks, some are English—there
      are many sorts of men, but God is one.”
    

      “Very good. If all men worship the same God, why do you Mohammedans
      look upon Christians as your everlasting enemies?”
    

      “Why are you angry?” said Kerbalay, laying both hands on his
      stomach. “You are a priest; I am a Mussulman: you say, ‘I want
      to eat’—I give it you. . . . Only the rich man distinguishes
      your God from my God; for the poor man it is all the same. If you please,
      it is ready.”
    

      While this theological conversation was taking place at the duhan,
      Laevsky was driving home thinking how dreadful it had been driving there
      at daybreak, when the roads, the rocks, and the mountains were wet and
      dark, and the uncertain future seemed like a terrible abyss, of which one
      could not see the bottom; while now the raindrops hanging on the grass and
      on the stones were sparkling in the sun like diamonds, nature was smiling
      joyfully, and the terrible future was left behind. He looked at
      Sheshkovsky’s sullen, tear-stained face, and at the two carriages
      ahead of them in which Von Koren, his seconds, and the doctor were
      sitting, and it seemed to him as though they were all coming back from a
      graveyard in which a wearisome, insufferable man who was a burden to
      others had just been buried.
    

      “Everything is over,” he thought of his past, cautiously
      touching his neck with his fingers.
    

      On the right side of his neck was a small swelling, of the length and
      breadth of his little finger, and he felt a pain, as though some one had
      passed a hot iron over his neck. The bullet had bruised it.
    

      Afterwards, when he got home, a strange, long, sweet day began for him,
      misty as forgetfulness. Like a man released from prison or from hospital,
      he stared at the long-familiar objects and wondered that the tables, the
      windows, the chairs, the light, and the sea stirred in him a keen,
      childish delight such as he had not known for long, long years. Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, pale and haggard, could not understand his gentle voice and
      strange movements; she made haste to tell him everything that had happened
      to her. . . . It seemed to her that very likely he scarcely heard and did
      not understand her, and that if he did know everything he would curse her
      and kill her, but he listened to her, stroked her face and hair, looked
      into her eyes and said:
    

      “I have nobody but you. . . .”
    

      Then they sat a long while in the garden, huddled close together, saying
      nothing, or dreaming aloud of their happy life in the future, in brief,
      broken sentences, while it seemed to him that he had never spoken at such
      length or so eloquently.
    

      XXI
    

      More than three months had passed.
    

      The day came that Von Koren had fixed on for his departure. A cold, heavy
      rain had been falling from early morning, a north-east wind was blowing,
      and the waves were high on the sea. It was said that the steamer would
      hardly be able to come into the harbour in such weather. By the time-table
      it should have arrived at ten o’clock in the morning, but Von Koren,
      who had gone on to the sea-front at midday and again after dinner, could
      see nothing through the field-glass but grey waves and rain covering the
      horizon.
    

      Towards the end of the day the rain ceased and the wind began to drop
      perceptibly. Von Koren had already made up his mind that he would not be
      able to get off that day, and had settled down to play chess with
      Samoylenko; but after dark the orderly announced that there were lights on
      the sea and that a rocket had been seen.
    

      Von Koren made haste. He put his satchel over his shoulder, and kissed
      Samoylenko and the deacon. Though there was not the slightest necessity,
      he went through the rooms again, said good-bye to the orderly and the
      cook, and went out into the street, feeling that he had left something
      behind, either at the doctor’s or his lodging. In the street he
      walked beside Samoylenko, behind them came the deacon with a box, and last
      of all the orderly with two portmanteaus. Only Samoylenko and the orderly
      could distinguish the dim lights on the sea. The others gazed into the
      darkness and saw nothing. The steamer had stopped a long way from the
      coast.
    

      “Make haste, make haste,” Von Koren hurried them. “I am
      afraid it will set off.”
    

      As they passed the little house with three windows, into which Laevsky had
      moved soon after the duel, Von Koren could not resist peeping in at the
      window. Laevsky was sitting, writing, bent over the table, with his back
      to the window.
    

      “I wonder at him!” said the zoologist softly. “What a
      screw he has put on himself!”
    

      “Yes, one may well wonder,” said Samoylenko. “He sits
      from morning till night, he’s always at work. He works to pay off
      his debts. And he lives, brother, worse than a beggar!”
    

      Half a minute of silence followed. The zoologist, the doctor, and the
      deacon stood at the window and went on looking at Laevsky.
    

      “So he didn’t get away from here, poor fellow,” said
      Samoylenko. “Do you remember how hard he tried?”
    

      “Yes, he has put a screw on himself,” Von Koren repeated.
      “His marriage, the way he works all day long for his daily bread, a
      new expression in his face, and even in his walk—it’s all so
      extraordinary that I don’t know what to call it.”
    

      The zoologist took Samoylenko’s sleeve and went on with emotion in
      his voice:
    

      “You tell him and his wife that when I went away I was full of
      admiration for them and wished them all happiness . . . and I beg him, if
      he can, not to remember evil against me. He knows me. He knows that if I
      could have foreseen this change, then I might have become his best friend.”
    

      “Go in and say good-bye to him.”
    

      “No, that wouldn’t do.”
    

      “Why? God knows, perhaps you’ll never see him again.”
    

      The zoologist reflected, and said:
    

      “That’s true.”
    

      Samoylenko tapped softly at the window. Laevsky started and looked round.
    

      “Vanya, Nikolay Vassilitch wants to say goodbye to you,” said
      Samoylenko. “He is just going away.”
    

      Laevsky got up from the table, and went into the passage to open the door.
      Samoylenko, the zoologist, and the deacon went into the house.
    

      “I can only come for one minute,” began the zoologist, taking
      off his goloshes in the passage, and already wishing he had not given way
      to his feelings and come in, uninvited. “It is as though I were
      forcing myself on him,” he thought, “and that’s stupid.”
    

      “Forgive me for disturbing you,” he said as he went into the
      room with Laevsky, “but I’m just going away, and I had an
      impulse to see you. God knows whether we shall ever meet again.”
    

      “I am very glad to see you. . . . Please come in,” said
      Laevsky, and he awkwardly set chairs for his visitors as though he wanted
      to bar their way, and stood in the middle of the room, rubbing his hands.
    

      “I should have done better to have left my audience in the street,”
      thought Von Koren, and he said firmly: “Don’t remember evil
      against me, Ivan Andreitch. To forget the past is, of course, impossible
      —it is too painful, and I’ve not come here to apologise or to
      declare that I was not to blame. I acted sincerely, and I have not changed
      my convictions since then. . . . It is true that I see, to my great
      delight, that I was mistaken in regard to you, but it’s easy to make
      a false step even on a smooth road, and, in fact, it’s the natural
      human lot: if one is not mistaken in the main, one is mistaken in the
      details. Nobody knows the real truth.”
    

      “No, no one knows the truth,” said Laevsky.
    

      “Well, good-bye. . . . God give you all happiness.”
    

      Von Koren gave Laevsky his hand; the latter took it and bowed.
    

      “Don’t remember evil against me,” said Von Koren.
      “Give my greetings to your wife, and say I am very sorry not to say
      good-bye to her.”
    

      “She is at home.”
    

      Laevsky went to the door of the next room, and said:
    

      “Nadya, Nikolay Vassilitch wants to say goodbye to you.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna came in; she stopped near the doorway and looked
      shyly at the visitors. There was a look of guilt and dismay on her face,
      and she held her hands like a schoolgirl receiving a scolding.
    

      “I’m just going away, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,” said Von
      Koren, “and have come to say good-bye.”
    

      She held out her hand uncertainly, while Laevsky bowed.
    

      “What pitiful figures they are, though!” thought Von Koren.
      “The life they are living does not come easy to them. I shall be in
      Moscow and Petersburg; can I send you anything?” he asked.
    

      “Oh!” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and she looked anxiously at
      her husband. “I don’t think there’s anything. . . .”
    

      “No, nothing . . .” said Laevsky, rubbing his hands. “Our
      greetings.”
    

      Von Koren did not know what he could or ought to say, though as he went in
      he thought he would say a very great deal that would be warm and good and
      important. He shook hands with Laevsky and his wife in silence, and left
      them with a depressed feeling.
    

      “What people!” said the deacon in a low voice, as he walked
      behind them. “My God, what people! Of a truth, the right hand of God
      has planted this vine! Lord! Lord! One man vanquishes thousands and
      another tens of thousands. Nikolay Vassilitch,” he said
      ecstatically, “let me tell you that to-day you have conquered the
      greatest of man’s enemies—pride.”
    

      “Hush, deacon! Fine conquerors we are! Conquerors ought to look like
      eagles, while he’s a pitiful figure, timid, crushed; he bows like a
      Chinese idol, and I, I am sad. . . .”
    

      They heard steps behind them. It was Laevsky, hurrying after them to see
      him off. The orderly was standing on the quay with the two portmanteaus,
      and at a little distance stood four boatmen.
    

      “There is a wind, though. . . . Brrr!” said Samoylenko.
      “There must be a pretty stiff storm on the sea now! You are not
      going off at a nice time, Koyla.”
    

      “I’m not afraid of sea-sickness.”
    

      “That’s not the point. . . . I only hope these rascals won’t
      upset you. You ought to have crossed in the agent’s sloop. Where’s
      the agent’s sloop?” he shouted to the boatmen.
    

      “It has gone, Your Excellency.”
    

      “And the Customs-house boat?”
    

      “That’s gone, too.”
    

      “Why didn’t you let us know,” said Samoylenko angrily.
      “You dolts!”
    

      “It’s all the same, don’t worry yourself . . .”
      said Von Koren. “Well, good-bye. God keep you.”
    

      Samoylenko embraced Von Koren and made the sign of the cross over him
      three times.
    

      “Don’t forget us, Kolya. . . . Write. . . . We shall look out
      for you next spring.”
    

      “Good-bye, deacon,” said Von Koren, shaking hands with the
      deacon. “Thank you for your company and for your pleasant
      conversation. Think about the expedition.”
    

      “Oh Lord, yes! to the ends of the earth,” laughed the deacon.
      “I’ve nothing against it.”
    

      Von Koren recognised Laevsky in the darkness, and held out his hand
      without speaking. The boatmen were by now below, holding the boat, which
      was beating against the piles, though the breakwater screened it from the
      breakers. Von Koren went down the ladder, jumped into the boat, and sat at
      the helm.
    

      “Write!” Samoylenko shouted to him. “Take care of
      yourself.”
    

      “No one knows the real truth,” thought Laevsky, turning up the
      collar of his coat and thrusting his hands into his sleeves.
    

      The boat turned briskly out of the harbour into the open sea. It vanished
      in the waves, but at once from a deep hollow glided up onto a high
      breaker, so that they could distinguish the men and even the oars. The
      boat moved three yards forward and was sucked two yards back.
    

      “Write!” shouted Samoylenko; “it’s devilish
      weather for you to go in.”
    

      “Yes, no one knows the real truth . . .” thought Laevsky,
      looking wearily at the dark, restless sea.
    

      “It flings the boat back,” he thought; “she makes two
      steps forward and one step back; but the boatmen are stubborn, they work
      the oars unceasingly, and are not afraid of the high waves. The boat goes
      on and on. Now she is out of sight, but in half an hour the boatmen will
      see the steamer lights distinctly, and within an hour they will be by the
      steamer ladder. So it is in life. . . . In the search for truth man makes
      two steps forward and one step back. Suffering, mistakes, and weariness of
      life thrust them back, but the thirst for truth and stubborn will drive
      them on and on. And who knows? Perhaps they will reach the real truth at
      last.”
    

      “Go—o—od-by—e,” shouted Samoylenko.
    

      “There’s no sight or sound of them,” said the deacon.
      “Good luck on the journey!”
    

      It began to spot with rain.
    











      EXCELLENT PEOPLE
    

ONCE upon a time
      there lived in Moscow a man called Vladimir Semyonitch Liadovsky. He took
      his degree at the university in the faculty of law and had a post on the
      board of management of some railway; but if you had asked him what his
      work was, he would look candidly and openly at you with his large bright
      eyes through his gold pincenez, and would answer in a soft, velvety,
      lisping baritone:
    

      “My work is literature.”
    

      After completing his course at the university, Vladimir Semyonitch had had
      a paragraph of theatrical criticism accepted by a newspaper. From this
      paragraph he passed on to reviewing, and a year later he had advanced to
      writing a weekly article on literary matters for the same paper. But it
      does not follow from these facts that he was an amateur, that his literary
      work was of an ephemeral, haphazard character. Whenever I saw his neat
      spare figure, his high forehead and long mane of hair, when I listened to
      his speeches, it always seemed to me that his writing, quite apart from
      what and how he wrote, was something organically part of him, like the
      beating of his heart, and that his whole literary programme must have been
      an integral part of his brain while he was a baby in his mother’s
      womb. Even in his walk, his gestures, his manner of shaking off the ash
      from his cigarette, I could read this whole programme from A to Z, with
      all its claptrap, dulness, and honourable sentiments. He was a literary
      man all over when with an inspired face he laid a wreath on the coffin of
      some celebrity, or with a grave and solemn face collected signatures for
      some address; his passion for making the acquaintance of distinguished
      literary men, his faculty for finding talent even where it was absent, his
      perpetual enthusiasm, his pulse that went at one hundred and twenty a
      minute, his ignorance of life, the genuinely feminine flutter with which
      he threw himself into concerts and literary evenings for the benefit of
      destitute students, the way in which he gravitated towards the young—all
      this would have created for him the reputation of a writer even if he had
      not written his articles.
    

      He was one of those writers to whom phrases like, “We are but few,”
      or “What would life be without strife? Forward!” were
      pre-eminently becoming, though he never strove with any one and never did
      go forward. It did not even sound mawkish when he fell to discoursing of
      ideals. Every anniversary of the university, on St. Tatiana’s Day,
      he got drunk, chanted Gaudeamus out of tune, and his beaming and
      perspiring countenance seemed to say: “See, I’m drunk; I’m
      keeping it up!” But even that suited him.
    

      Vladimir Semyonitch had genuine faith in his literary vocation and his
      whole programme. He had no doubts, and was evidently very well pleased
      with himself. Only one thing grieved him—the paper for which he
      worked had a limited circulation and was not very influential. But
      Vladimir Semyonitch believed that sooner or later he would succeed in
      getting on to a solid magazine where he would have scope and could display
      himself—and what little distress he felt on this score was pale
      beside the brilliance of his hopes.
    

      Visiting this charming man, I made the acquaintance of his sister, Vera
      Semyonovna, a woman doctor. At first sight, what struck me about this
      woman was her look of exhaustion and extreme ill-health. She was young,
      with a good figure and regular, rather large features, but in comparison
      with her agile, elegant, and talkative brother she seemed angular,
      listless, slovenly, and sullen. There was something strained, cold,
      apathetic in her movements, smiles, and words; she was not liked, and was
      thought proud and not very intelligent.
    

      In reality, I fancy, she was resting.
    

      “My dear friend,” her brother would often say to me, sighing
      and flinging back his hair in his picturesque literary way, “one
      must never judge by appearances! Look at this book: it has long ago been
      read. It is warped, tattered, and lies in the dust uncared for; but open
      it, and it will make you weep and turn pale. My sister is like that book.
      Lift the cover and peep into her soul, and you will be horror-stricken.
      Vera passed in some three months through experiences that would have been
      ample for a whole lifetime!”
    

      Vladimir Semyonitch looked round him, took me by the sleeve, and began to
      whisper:
    

      “You know, after taking her degree she married, for love, an
      architect. It’s a complete tragedy! They had hardly been married a
      month when—whew—her husband died of typhus. But that was not
      all. She caught typhus from him, and when, on her recovery, she learnt
      that her Ivan was dead, she took a good dose of morphia. If it had not
      been for vigorous measures taken by her friends, my Vera would have been
      by now in Paradise. Tell me, isn’t it a tragedy? And is not my
      sister like an ingÃ©nue, who has played already all the five acts of
      her life? The audience may stay for the farce, but the ingÃ©nue must
      go home to rest.”
    

      After three months of misery Vera Semyonovna had come to live with her
      brother. She was not fitted for the practice of medicine, which exhausted
      her and did not satisfy her; she did not give one the impression of
      knowing her subject, and I never once heard her say anything referring to
      her medical studies.
    

      She gave up medicine, and, silent and unoccupied, as though she were a
      prisoner, spent the remainder of her youth in colourless apathy, with
      bowed head and hanging hands. The only thing to which she was not
      completely indifferent, and which brought some brightness into the
      twilight of her life, was the presence of her brother, whom she loved. She
      loved him himself and his programme, she was full of reverence for his
      articles; and when she was asked what her brother was doing, she would
      answer in a subdued voice as though afraid of waking or distracting him:
      “He is writing. . . .” Usually when he was at his work she
      used to sit beside him, her eyes fixed on his writing hand. She used at
      such moments to look like a sick animal warming itself in the sun. . . .
    

      One winter evening Vladimir Semyonitch was sitting at his table writing a
      critical article for his newspaper: Vera Semyonovna was sitting beside
      him, staring as usual at his writing hand. The critic wrote rapidly,
      without erasures or corrections. The pen scratched and squeaked. On the
      table near the writing hand there lay open a freshly-cut volume of a thick
      magazine, containing a story of peasant life, signed with two initials.
      Vladimir Semyonitch was enthusiastic; he thought the author was admirable
      in his handling of the subject, suggested Turgenev in his descriptions of
      nature, was truthful, and had an excellent knowledge of the life of the
      peasantry. The critic himself knew nothing of peasant life except from
      books and hearsay, but his feelings and his inner convictions forced him
      to believe the story. He foretold a brilliant future for the author,
      assured him he should await the conclusion of the story with great
      impatience, and so on.
    

      “Fine story!” he said, flinging himself back in his chair and
      closing his eyes with pleasure. “The tone is extremely good.”
    

      Vera Semyonovna looked at him, yawned aloud, and suddenly asked an
      unexpected question. In the evening she had a habit of yawning nervously
      and asking short, abrupt questions, not always relevant.
    

      “Volodya,” she asked, “what is the meaning of
      non-resistance to evil?”
    

      “Non-resistance to evil!” repeated her brother, opening his
      eyes.
    

      “Yes. What do you understand by it?”
    

      “You see, my dear, imagine that thieves or brigands attack you, and
      you, instead of . . .”
    

      “No, give me a logical definition.”
    

      “A logical definition? Um! Well.” Vladimir Semyonitch
      pondered. “Non-resistance to evil means an attitude of
      non-interference with regard to all that in the sphere of mortality is
      called evil.”
    

      Saying this, Vladimir Semyonitch bent over the table and took up a novel.
      This novel, written by a woman, dealt with the painfulness of the
      irregular position of a society lady who was living under the same roof
      with her lover and her illegitimate child. Vladimir Semyonitch was pleased
      with the excellent tendency of the story, the plot and the presentation of
      it. Making a brief summary of the novel, he selected the best passages and
      added to them in his account: “How true to reality, how living, how
      picturesque! The author is not merely an artist; he is also a subtle
      psychologist who can see into the hearts of his characters. Take, for
      example, this vivid description of the emotions of the heroine on meeting
      her husband,” and so on.
    

      “Volodya,” Vera Semyonovna interrupted his critical effusions,
      “I’ve been haunted by a strange idea since yesterday. I keep
      wondering where we should all be if human life were ordered on the basis
      of non-resistance to evil?”
    

      “In all probability, nowhere. Non-resistance to evil would give the
      full rein to the criminal will, and, to say nothing of civilisation, this
      would leave not one stone standing upon another anywhere on earth.”
    

      “What would be left?”
    

      “Bashi-Bazouke and brothels. In my next article I’ll talk
      about that perhaps. Thank you for reminding me.”
    

      And a week later my friend kept his promise. That was just at the period—in
      the eighties—when people were beginning to talk and write of
      non-resistance, of the right to judge, to punish, to make war; when some
      people in our set were beginning to do without servants, to retire into
      the country, to work on the land, and to renounce animal food and carnal
      love.
    

      After reading her brother’s article, Vera Semyonovna pondered and
      hardly perceptibly shrugged her shoulders.
    

      “Very nice!” she said. “But still there’s a great
      deal I don’t understand. For instance, in Leskov’s story
      ‘Belonging to the Cathedral’ there is a queer gardener who
      sows for the benefit of all—for customers, for beggars, and any who
      care to steal. Did he behave sensibly?”
    

      From his sister’s tone and expression Vladimir Semyonitch saw that
      she did not like his article, and, almost for the first time in his life,
      his vanity as an author sustained a shock. With a shade of irritation he
      answered:
    

      “Theft is immoral. To sow for thieves is to recognise the right of
      thieves to existence. What would you think if I were to establish a
      newspaper and, dividing it into sections, provide for blackmailing as well
      as for liberal ideas? Following the example of that gardener, I ought,
      logically, to provide a section for blackmailers, the intellectual
      scoundrels? Yes.”
    

      Vera Semyonovna made no answer. She got up from the table, moved languidly
      to the sofa and lay down.
    

      “I don’t know, I know nothing about it,” she said
      musingly. “You are probably right, but it seems to me, I feel
      somehow, that there’s something false in our resistance to evil, as
      though there were something concealed or unsaid. God knows, perhaps our
      methods of resisting evil belong to the category of prejudices which have
      become so deeply rooted in us, that we are incapable of parting with them,
      and therefore cannot form a correct judgment of them.”
    

      “How do you mean?”
    

      “I don’t know how to explain to you. Perhaps man is mistaken
      in thinking that he is obliged to resist evil and has a right to do so,
      just as he is mistaken in thinking, for instance, that the heart looks
      like an ace of hearts. It is very possible in resisting evil we ought not
      to use force, but to use what is the very opposite of force—if you,
      for instance, don’t want this picture stolen from you, you ought to
      give it away rather than lock it up. . . .”
    

      “That’s clever, very clever! If I want to marry a rich, vulgar
      woman, she ought to prevent me from such a shabby action by hastening to
      make me an offer herself!”
    

      The brother and sister talked till midnight without understanding each
      other. If any outsider had overheard them he would hardly have been able
      to make out what either of them was driving at.
    

      They usually spent the evening at home. There were no friends’
      houses to which they could go, and they felt no need for friends; they
      only went to the theatre when there was a new play—such was the
      custom in literary circles—they did not go to concerts, for they did
      not care for music.
    

      “You may think what you like,” Vera Semyonovna began again the
      next day, “but for me the question is to a great extent settled. I
      am firmly convinced that I have no grounds for resisting evil directed
      against me personally. If they want to kill me, let them. My defending
      myself will not make the murderer better. All I have now to decide is the
      second half of the question: how I ought to behave to evil directed
      against my neighbours?”
    

      “Vera, mind you don’t become rabid!” said Vladimir
      Semyonitch, laughing. “I see non-resistance is becoming your idÃ©e
      fixe!”
    

      He wanted to turn off these tedious conversations with a jest, but somehow
      it was beyond a jest; his smile was artificial and sour. His sister gave
      up sitting beside his table and gazing reverently at his writing hand, and
      he felt every evening that behind him on the sofa lay a person who did not
      agree with him. And his back grew stiff and numb, and there was a chill in
      his soul. An author’s vanity is vindictive, implacable, incapable of
      forgiveness, and his sister was the first and only person who had laid
      bare and disturbed that uneasy feeling, which is like a big box of
      crockery, easy to unpack but impossible to pack up again as it was before.
    

      Weeks and months passed by, and his sister clung to her ideas, and did not
      sit down by the table. One spring evening Vladimir Semyonitch was sitting
      at his table writing an article. He was reviewing a novel which described
      how a village schoolmistress refused the man whom she loved and who loved
      her, a man both wealthy and intellectual, simply because marriage made her
      work as a schoolmistress impossible. Vera Semyonovna lay on the sofa and
      brooded.
    

      “My God, how slow it is!” she said, stretching. “How
      insipid and empty life is! I don’t know what to do with myself, and
      you are wasting your best years in goodness knows what. Like some
      alchemist, you are rummaging in old rubbish that nobody wants. My God!”
    

      Vladimir Semyonitch dropped his pen and slowly looked round at his sister.
    

      “It’s depressing to look at you!” said his sister.
      “Wagner in ‘Faust’ dug up worms, but he was looking for
      a treasure, anyway, and you are looking for worms for the sake of the
      worms.”
    

      “That’s vague!”
    

      “Yes, Volodya; all these days I’ve been thinking, I’ve
      been thinking painfully for a long time, and I have come to the conclusion
      that you are hopelessly reactionary and conventional. Come, ask yourself
      what is the object of your zealous, conscientious work? Tell me, what is
      it? Why, everything has long ago been extracted that can be extracted from
      that rubbish in which you are always rummaging. You may pound water in a
      mortar and analyse it as long as you like, you’ll make nothing more
      of it than the chemists have made already. . . .”
    

      “Indeed!” drawled Vladimir Semyonitch, getting up. “Yes,
      all this is old rubbish because these ideas are eternal; but what do you
      consider new, then?”
    

      “You undertake to work in the domain of thought; it is for you to
      think of something new. It’s not for me to teach you.”
    

      “Me—an alchemist!” the critic cried in wonder and
      indignation, screwing up his eyes ironically. “Art, progress—all
      that is alchemy?”
    

      “You see, Volodya, it seems to me that if all you thinking people
      had set yourselves to solving great problems, all these little questions
      that you fuss about now would solve themselves by the way. If you go up in
      a balloon to see a town, you will incidentally, without any effort, see
      the fields and the villages and the rivers as well. When stearine is
      manufactured, you get glycerine as a by-product. It seems to me that
      contemporary thought has settled on one spot and stuck to it. It is
      prejudiced, apathetic, timid, afraid to take a wide titanic flight, just
      as you and I are afraid to climb on a high mountain; it is conservative.”
    

      Such conversations could not but leave traces. The relations of the
      brother and sister grew more and more strained every day. The brother
      became unable to work in his sister’s presence, and grew irritable
      when he knew his sister was lying on the sofa, looking at his back; while
      the sister frowned nervously and stretched when, trying to bring back the
      past, he attempted to share his enthusiasms with her. Every evening she
      complained of being bored, and talked about independence of mind and those
      who are in the rut of tradition. Carried away by her new ideas, Vera
      Semyonovna proved that the work that her brother was so engrossed in was
      conventional, that it was a vain effort of conservative minds to preserve
      what had already served its turn and was vanishing from the scene of
      action. She made no end of comparisons. She compared her brother at one
      time to an alchemist, then to a musty old Believer who would sooner die
      than listen to reason. By degrees there was a perceptible change in her
      manner of life, too. She was capable of lying on the sofa all day long
      doing nothing but think, while her face wore a cold, dry expression such
      as one sees in one-sided people of strong faith. She began to refuse the
      attentions of the servants, swept and tidied her own room, cleaned her own
      boots and brushed her own clothes. Her brother could not help looking with
      irritation and even hatred at her cold face when she went about her menial
      work. In that work, which was always performed with a certain solemnity,
      he saw something strained and false, he saw something both pharisaical and
      affected. And knowing he could not touch her by persuasion, he carped at
      her and teased her like a schoolboy.
    

      “You won’t resist evil, but you resist my having servants!”
      he taunted her. “If servants are an evil, why do you oppose it? That’s
      inconsistent!”
    

      He suffered, was indignant and even ashamed. He felt ashamed when his
      sister began doing odd things before strangers.
    

      “It’s awful, my dear fellow,” he said to me in private,
      waving his hands in despair. “It seems that our ingÃ©nue has
      remained to play a part in the farce, too. She’s become morbid to
      the marrow of her bones! I’ve washed my hands of her, let her think
      as she likes; but why does she talk, why does she excite me? She ought to
      think what it means for me to listen to her. What I feel when in my
      presence she has the effrontery to support her errors by blasphemously
      quoting the teaching of Christ! It chokes me! It makes me hot all over to
      hear my sister propounding her doctrines and trying to distort the Gospel
      to suit her, when she purposely refrains from mentioning how the
      moneychangers were driven out of the Temple. That’s, my dear fellow,
      what comes of being half educated, undeveloped! That’s what comes of
      medical studies which provide no general culture!”
    

      One day on coming home from the office, Vladimir Semyonitch found his
      sister crying. She was sitting on the sofa with her head bowed, wringing
      her hands, and tears were flowing freely down her cheeks. The critic’s
      good heart throbbed with pain. Tears fell from his eyes, too, and he
      longed to pet his sister, to forgive her, to beg her forgiveness, and to
      live as they used to before. . . . He knelt down and kissed her head, her
      hands, her shoulders. . . . She smiled, smiled bitterly, unaccountably,
      while he with a cry of joy jumped up, seized the magazine from the table
      and said warmly:
    

      “Hurrah! We’ll live as we used to, Verotchka! With God’s
      blessing! And I’ve such a surprise for you here! Instead of
      celebrating the occasion with champagne, let us read it together! A
      splendid, wonderful thing!”
    

      “Oh, no, no!” cried Vera Semyonovna, pushing away the book in
      alarm. “I’ve read it already! I don’t want it, I don’t
      want it!”
    

      “When did you read it?”
    

      “A year . . . two years ago. . . I read it long ago, and I know it,
      I know it!”
    

      “H’m! . . . You’re a fanatic!” her brother said
      coldly, flinging the magazine on to the table.
    

      “No, you are a fanatic, not I! You!” And Vera Semyonovna
      dissolved into tears again. Her brother stood before her, looked at her
      quivering shoulders, and thought. He thought, not of the agonies of
      loneliness endured by any one who begins to think in a new way of their
      own, not of the inevitable sufferings of a genuine spiritual revolution,
      but of the outrage of his programme, the outrage to his author’s
      vanity.
    

      From this time he treated his sister coldly, with careless irony, and he
      endured her presence in the room as one endures the presence of old women
      that are dependent on one. For her part, she left off disputing with him
      and met all his arguments, jeers, and attacks with a condescending silence
      which irritated him more than ever.
    

      One summer morning Vera Semyonovna, dressed for travelling with a satchel
      over her shoulder, went in to her brother and coldly kissed him on the
      forehead.
    

      “Where are you going?” he asked with surprise.
    

      “To the province of N. to do vaccination work.” Her brother
      went out into the street with her.
    

      “So that’s what you’ve decided upon, you queer girl,”
      he muttered. “Don’t you want some money?”
    

      “No, thank you. Good-bye.”
    

      The sister shook her brother’s hand and set off.
    

      “Why don’t you have a cab?” cried Vladimir Semyonitch.
    

      She did not answer. Her brother gazed after her, watched her rusty-looking
      waterproof, the swaying of her figure as she slouched along, forced
      himself to sigh, but did not succeed in rousing a feeling of regret. His
      sister had become a stranger to him. And he was a stranger to her. Anyway,
      she did not once look round.
    

      Going back to his room, Vladimir Semyonitch at once sat down to the table
      and began to work at his article.
    

      I never saw Vera Semyonovna again. Where she is now I do not know. And
      Vladimir Semyonitch went on writing his articles, laying wreaths on
      coffins, singing Gaudeamus, busying himself over the Mutual Aid
      Society of Moscow Journalists.
    

      He fell ill with inflammation of the lungs; he was ill in bed for three
      months—at first at home, and afterwards in the Golitsyn Hospital. An
      abscess developed in his knee. People said he ought to be sent to the
      Crimea, and began getting up a collection for him. But he did not go to
      the Crimea—he died. We buried him in the Vagankovsky Cemetery, on
      the left side, where artists and literary men are buried.
    

      One day we writers were sitting in the Tatars’ restaurant. I
      mentioned that I had lately been in the Vagankovsky Cemetery and had seen
      Vladimir Semyonitch’s grave there. It was utterly neglected and
      almost indistinguishable from the rest of the ground, the cross had
      fallen; it was necessary to collect a few roubles to put it in order.
    

      But they listened to what I said unconcernedly, made no answer, and I
      could not collect a farthing. No one remembered Vladimir Semyonitch. He
      was utterly forgotten.
    











      MIRE
    

      I
    

GRACEFULLY swaying
      in the saddle, a young man wearing the snow-white tunic of an officer rode
      into the great yard of the vodka distillery belonging to the heirs of M.
      E. Rothstein. The sun smiled carelessly on the lieutenant’s little
      stars, on the white trunks of the birch-trees, on the heaps of broken
      glass scattered here and there in the yard. The radiant, vigorous beauty
      of a summer day lay over everything, and nothing hindered the snappy young
      green leaves from dancing gaily and winking at the clear blue sky. Even
      the dirty and soot-begrimed appearance of the bricksheds and the stifling
      fumes of the distillery did not spoil the general good impression. The
      lieutenant sprang gaily out of the saddle, handed over his horse to a man
      who ran up, and stroking with his finger his delicate black moustaches,
      went in at the front door. On the top step of the old but light and softly
      carpeted staircase he was met by a maidservant with a haughty, not very
      youthful face. The lieutenant gave her his card without speaking.
    

      As she went through the rooms with the card, the maid could see on it the
      name “Alexandr Grigoryevitch Sokolsky.” A minute later she
      came back and told the lieutenant that her mistress could not see him, as
      she was not feeling quite well. Sokolsky looked at the ceiling and thrust
      out his lower lip.
    

      “How vexatious!” he said. “Listen, my dear,” he
      said eagerly. “Go and tell Susanna Moiseyevna, that it is very
      necessary for me to speak to her—very. I will only keep her one
      minute. Ask her to excuse me.”
    

      The maid shrugged one shoulder and went off languidly to her mistress.
    

      “Very well!” she sighed, returning after a brief interval.
      “Please walk in!”
    

      The lieutenant went with her through five or six large, luxuriously
      furnished rooms and a corridor, and finally found himself in a large and
      lofty square room, in which from the first step he was impressed by the
      abundance of flowers and plants and the sweet, almost revoltingly heavy
      fragrance of jasmine. Flowers were trained to trellis-work along the
      walls, screening the windows, hung from the ceiling, and were wreathed
      over the corners, so that the room was more like a greenhouse than a place
      to live in. Tits, canaries, and goldfinches chirruped among the green
      leaves and fluttered against the window-panes.
    

      “Forgive me for receiving you here,” the lieutenant heard in a
      mellow feminine voice with a burr on the letter r which was not
      without charm. “Yesterday I had a sick headache, and I’m
      trying to keep still to prevent its coming on again. What do you want?”
    

      Exactly opposite the entrance, he saw sitting in a big low chair, such as
      old men use, a woman in an expensive Chinese dressing-gown, with her head
      wrapped up, leaning back on a pillow. Nothing could be seen behind the
      woollen shawl in which she was muffled but a pale, long, pointed, somewhat
      aquiline nose, and one large dark eye. Her ample dressing-gown concealed
      her figure, but judging from her beautiful hand, from her voice, her nose,
      and her eye, she might be twenty-six or twenty-eight.
    

      “Forgive me for being so persistent . . .” began the
      lieutenant, cGlinking his spurs. “Allow me to introduce myself:
      Sokolsky! I come with a message from my cousin, your neighbour, Alexey
      Ivanovitch Kryukov, who . . .”
    

      “I know!” interposed Susanna Moiseyevna. “I know
      Kryukov. Sit down; I don’t like anything big standing before me.”
    

      “My cousin charges me to ask you a favour,” the lieutenant
      went on, cGlinking his spurs once more and sitting down. “The fact
      is, your late father made a purchase of oats from my cousin last winter,
      and a small sum was left owing. The payment only becomes due next week,
      but my cousin begs you most particularly to pay him—if possible,
      to-day.”
    

      As the lieutenant talked, he stole side-glances about him.
    

      “Surely I’m not in her bedroom?” he thought.
    

      In one corner of the room, where the foliage was thickest and tallest,
      under a pink awning like a funeral canopy, stood a bed not yet made, with
      the bedclothes still in disorder. Close by on two arm-chairs lay heaps of
      crumpled feminine garments. Petticoats and sleeves with rumpled lace and
      flounces were trailing on the carpet, on which here and there lay bits of
      white tape, cigarette-ends, and the papers of caramels. . . . Under the
      bed the toes, pointed and square, of slippers of all kinds peeped out in a
      long row. And it seemed to the lieutenant that the scent of the jasmine
      came not from the flowers, but from the bed and the slippers.
    

      “And what is the sum owing?” asked Susanna Moiseyevna.
    

      “Two thousand three hundred.”
    

      “Oho!” said the Jewess, showing another large black eye.
      “And you call that—a small sum! However, it’s just the
      same paying it to-day or paying it in a week, but I’ve had so many
      payments to make in the last two months since my father’s death. . .
      . Such a lot of stupid business, it makes my head go round! A nice idea! I
      want to go abroad, and they keep forcing me to attend to these silly
      things. Vodka, oats . . .” she muttered, half closing her eyes,
      “oats, bills, percentages, or, as my head-clerk says, ‘percentage.’
      . . . It’s awful. Yesterday I simply turned the excise officer out.
      He pesters me with his Tralles. I said to him: ‘Go to the devil with
      your Tralles! I can’t see any one!’ He kissed my hand and went
      away. I tell you what: can’t your cousin wait two or three months?”
    

      “A cruel question!” laughed the lieutenant. “My cousin
      can wait a year, but it’s I who cannot wait! You see, it’s on
      my own account I’m acting, I ought to tell you. At all costs I must
      have money, and by ill-luck my cousin hasn’t a rouble to spare. I’m
      forced to ride about and collect debts. I’ve just been to see a
      peasant, our tenant; here I’m now calling on you; from here I shall
      go on to somewhere else, and keep on like that until I get together five
      thousand roubles. I need money awfully!”
    

      “Nonsense! What does a young man want with money? Whims, mischief.
      Why, have you been going in for dissipation? Or losing at cards? Or are
      you getting married?”
    

      “You’ve guessed!” laughed the lieutenant, and rising
      slightly from his seat, he cGlinked his spurs. “I really am going to
      be married.”
    

      Susanna Moiseyevna looked intently at her visitor, made a wry face, and
      sighed.
    

      “I can’t make out what possesses people to get married!”
      she said, looking about her for her pocket-handkerchief. “Life is so
      short, one has so little freedom, and they must put chains on themselves!”
    

      “Every one has his own way of looking at things. . . .”
    

      “Yes, yes, of course; every one has his own way of looking at things
      . . . . But, I say, are you really going to marry some one poor? Are you
      passionately in love? And why must you have five thousand? Why won’t
      four do, or three?”
    

      “What a tongue she has!” thought the lieutenant, and answered:
      “The difficulty is that an officer is not allowed by law to marry
      till he is twenty-eight; if you choose to marry, you have to leave the
      Service or else pay a deposit of five thousand.”
    

      “Ah, now I understand. Listen. You said just now that every one has
      his own way of looking at things. . . . Perhaps your fiancÃ©e is some one
      special and remarkable, but . . . but I am utterly unable to understand
      how any decent man can live with a woman. I can’t for the life of me
      understand it. I have lived, thank the Lord, twenty-seven years, and I
      have never yet seen an endurable woman. They’re all affected minxes,
      immoral, liars. . . . The only ones I can put up with are cooks and
      housemaids, but so-called ladies I won’t let come within shooting
      distance of me. But, thank God, they hate me and don’t force
      themselves on me! If one of them wants money she sends her husband, but
      nothing will induce her to come herself, not from pride—no, but from
      cowardice; she’s afraid of my making a scene. Oh, I understand their
      hatred very well! Rather! I openly display what they do their very utmost
      to conceal from God and man. How can they help hating me? No doubt you’ve
      heard bushels of scandal about me already. . . .”
    

      “I only arrived here so lately . . .”
    

      “Tut, tut, tut! . . . I see from your eyes! But your brother’s
      wife, surely she primed you for this expedition? Think of letting a young
      man come to see such an awful woman without warning him—how could
      she? Ha, ha! . . . But tell me, how is your brother? He’s a fine
      fellow, such a handsome man! . . . I’ve seen him several times at
      mass. Why do you look at me like that? I very often go to church! We all
      have the same God. To an educated person externals matter less than the
      idea. . . . That’s so, isn’t it?”
    

      “Yes, of course . . .” smiled the lieutenant.
    

      “Yes, the idea. . . . But you are not a bit like your brother. You
      are handsome, too, but your brother is a great deal better-looking. There’s
      wonderfully little likeness!”
    

      “That’s quite natural; he’s not my brother, but my
      cousin.”
    

      “Ah, to be sure! So you must have the money to-day? Why to-day?”
    

      “My furlough is over in a few days.”
    

      “Well, what’s to be done with you!” sighed Susanna
      Moiseyevna. “So be it. I’ll give you the money, though I know
      you’ll abuse me for it afterwards. You’ll quarrel with your
      wife after you are married, and say: ‘If that mangy Jewess hadn’t
      given me the money, I should perhaps have been as free as a bird to-day!’
      Is your fiancÃ©e pretty?”
    

      “Oh yes. . . .”
    

      “H’m! . . . Anyway, better something, if it’s only
      beauty, than nothing. Though however beautiful a woman is, it can never
      make up to her husband for her silliness.”
    

      “That’s original!” laughed the lieutenant. “You
      are a woman yourself, and such a woman-hater!”
    

      “A woman . . .” smiled Susanna. “It’s not my fault
      that God has cast me into this mould, is it? I’m no more to blame
      for it than you are for having moustaches. The violin is not responsible
      for the choice of its case. I am very fond of myself, but when any one
      reminds me that I am a woman, I begin to hate myself. Well, you can go
      away, and I’ll dress. Wait for me in the drawing-room.”
    

      The lieutenant went out, and the first thing he did was to draw a deep
      breath, to get rid of the heavy scent of jasmine, which had begun to
      irritate his throat and to make him feel giddy.
    

      “What a strange woman!” he thought, looking about him. “She
      talks fluently, but . . . far too much, and too freely. She must be
      neurotic.”
    

      The drawing-room, in which he was standing now, was richly furnished, and
      had pretensions to luxury and style. There were dark bronze dishes with
      patterns in relief, views of Nice and the Rhine on the tables,
      old-fashioned sconces, Japanese statuettes, but all this striving after
      luxury and style only emphasised the lack of taste which was glaringly
      apparent in the gilt cornices, the gaudy wall-paper, the bright velvet
      table-cloths, the common oleographs in heavy frames. The bad taste of the
      general effect was the more complete from the lack of finish and the
      overcrowding of the room, which gave one a feeling that something was
      lacking, and that a great deal should have been thrown away. It was
      evident that the furniture had not been bought all at once, but had been
      picked up at auctions and other favourable opportunities.
    

      Heaven knows what taste the lieutenant could boast of, but even he noticed
      one characteristic peculiarity about the whole place, which no luxury or
      style could efface—a complete absence of all trace of womanly,
      careful hands, which, as we all know, give a warmth, poetry, and snugness
      to the furnishing of a room. There was a chilliness about it such as one
      finds in waiting-rooms at stations, in clubs, and foyers at the theatres.
    

      There was scarcely anything in the room definitely Jewish, except,
      perhaps, a big picture of the meeting of Jacob and Esau. The lieutenant
      looked round about him, and, shrugging his shoulders, thought of his
      strange, new acquaintance, of her free-and-easy manners, and her way of
      talking. But then the door opened, and in the doorway appeared the lady
      herself, in a long black dress, so slim and tightly laced that her figure
      looked as though it had been turned in a lathe. Now the lieutenant saw not
      only the nose and eyes, but also a thin white face, a head black and as
      curly as lamb’s-wool. She did not attract him, though she did not
      strike him as ugly. He had a prejudice against un-Russian faces in
      general, and he considered, too, that the lady’s white face, the
      whiteness of which for some reason suggested the cloying scent of jasmine,
      did not go well with her little black curls and thick eyebrows; that her
      nose and ears were astoundingly white, as though they belonged to a
      corpse, or had been moulded out of transparent wax. When she smiled she
      showed pale gums as well as her teeth, and he did not like that either.
    

      “AnÃ¦mic debility . . .” he thought; “she’s
      probably as nervous as a turkey.”
    

      “Here I am! Come along!” she said, going on rapidly ahead of
      him and pulling off the yellow leaves from the plants as she passed.
    

      “I’ll give you the money directly, and if you like I’ll
      give you some lunch. Two thousand three hundred roubles! After such a good
      stroke of business you’ll have an appetite for your lunch. Do you
      like my rooms? The ladies about here declare that my rooms always smell of
      garlic. With that culinary gibe their stock of wit is exhausted. I hasten
      to assure you that I’ve no garlic even in the cellar. And one day
      when a doctor came to see me who smelt of garlic, I asked him to take his
      hat and go and spread his fragrance elsewhere. There is no smell of garlic
      here, but the place does smell of drugs. My father lay paralyzed for a
      year and a half, and the whole house smelt of medicine. A year and a half!
      I was sorry to lose him, but I’m glad he’s dead: he suffered
      so!”
    

      She led the officer through two rooms similar to the drawing-room, through
      a large reception hall, and came to a stop in her study, where there was a
      lady’s writing-table covered with little knick-knacks. On the carpet
      near it several books lay strewn about, opened and folded back. Through a
      small door leading from the study he saw a table laid for lunch.
    

      Still chatting, Susanna took out of her pocket a bunch of little keys and
      unlocked an ingeniously made cupboard with a curved, sloping lid. When the
      lid was raised the cupboard emitted a plaintive note which made the
      lieutenant think of an Ãolian harp. Susanna picked out another key and
      clicked another lock.
    

      “I have underground passages here and secret doors,” she said,
      taking out a small morocco portfolio. “It’s a funny cupboard,
      isn’t it? And in this portfolio I have a quarter of my fortune. Look
      how podgy it is! You won’t strangle me, will you?”
    

      Susanna raised her eyes to the lieutenant and laughed good-naturedly. The
      lieutenant laughed too.
    

      “She’s rather jolly,” he thought, watching the keys
      flashing between her fingers.
    

      “Here it is,” she said, picking out the key of the portfolio.
      “Now, Mr. Creditor, trot out the IOU. What a silly thing money is
      really! How paltry it is, and yet how women love it! I am a Jewess, you
      know, to the marrow of my bones. I am passionately fond of Shmuls and
      Yankels, but how I loathe that passion for gain in our Semitic blood. They
      hoard and they don’t know what they are hoarding for. One ought to
      live and enjoy oneself, but they’re afraid of spending an extra
      farthing. In that way I am more like an hussar than a Shmul. I don’t
      like money to be kept long in one place. And altogether I fancy I’m
      not much like a Jewess. Does my accent give me away much, eh?”
    

      “What shall I say?” mumbled the lieutenant. “You speak
      good Russian, but you do roll your r’s.”
    

      Susanna laughed and put the little key in the lock of the portfolio. The
      lieutenant took out of his pocket a little roll of IOUs and laid them with
      a notebook on the table.
    

      “Nothing betrays a Jew as much as his accent,” Susanna went
      on, looking gaily at the lieutenant. “However much he twists himself
      into a Russian or a Frenchman, ask him to say ‘feather’ and he
      will say ‘fedder’ . . . but I pronounce it correctly: ‘Feather!
      feather! feather!’”
    

      Both laughed.
    

      “By Jove, she’s very jolly!” thought Sokolsky.
    

      Susanna put the portfolio on a chair, took a step towards the lieutenant,
      and bringing her face close to his, went on gaily:
    

      “Next to the Jews I love no people so much as the Russian and the
      French. I did not do much at school and I know no history, but it seems to
      me that the fate of the world lies in the hands of those two nations. I
      lived a long time abroad. . . . I spent six months in Madrid. . . . I’ve
      gazed my fill at the public, and the conclusion I’ve come to is that
      there are no decent peoples except the Russian and the French. Take the
      languages, for instance. . . . The German language is like the neighing of
      horses; as for the English . . . you can’t imagine anything
      stupider. Fight—feet—foot! Italian is only pleasant when they
      speak it slowly. If you listen to Italians gabbling, you get the effect of
      the Jewish jargon. And the Poles? Mercy on us! There’s no language
      so disgusting! ‘Nie pieprz, Pietrze, pieprzem wieprza bo mozeoz
      przepieprzyÃ© wieprza pieprzem.’ That means: ‘Don’t
      pepper a sucking pig with pepper, Pyotr, or perhaps you’ll
      over-pepper the sucking pig with pepper.’ Ha, ha, ha!”
    

      Susanna Moiseyevna rolled her eyes and broke into such a pleasant,
      infectious laugh that the lieutenant, looking at her, went off into a loud
      and merry peal of laughter. She took the visitor by the button, and went
      on:
    

      “You don’t like Jews, of course . . . they’ve many
      faults, like all nations. I don’t dispute that. But are the Jews to
      blame for it? No, it’s not the Jews who are to blame, but the Jewish
      women! They are narrow-minded, greedy; there’s no sort of poetry
      about them, they’re dull. . . . You have never lived with a Jewess,
      so you don’t know how charming it is!” Susanna Moiseyevna
      pronounced the last words with deliberate emphasis and with no eagerness
      or laughter. She paused as though frightened at her own openness, and her
      face was suddenly distorted in a strange, unaccountable way. Her eyes
      stared at the lieutenant without bGlinking, her lips parted and showed
      clenched teeth. Her whole face, her throat, and even her bosom, seemed
      quivering with a spiteful, catlike expression. Still keeping her eyes
      fixed on her visitor, she rapidly bent to one side, and swiftly, like a
      cat, snatched something from the table. All this was the work of a few
      seconds. Watching her movements, the lieutenant saw five fingers crumple
      up his IOUs and caught a glimpse of the white rustling paper as it
      disappeared in her clenched fist. Such an extraordinary transition from
      good-natured laughter to crime so appalled him that he turned pale and
      stepped back. . . .
    

      And she, still keeping her frightened, searching eyes upon him, felt along
      her hip with her clenched fist for her pocket. Her fist struggled
      convulsively for the pocket, like a fish in the net, and could not find
      the opening. In another moment the IOUs would have vanished in the
      recesses of her feminine garments, but at that point the lieutenant
      uttered a faint cry, and, moved more by instinct than reflection, seized
      the Jewess by her arm above the clenched fist. Showing her teeth more than
      ever, she struggled with all her might and pulled her hand away. Then
      Sokolsky put his right arm firmly round her waist, and the other round her
      chest and a struggle followed. Afraid of outraging her sex or hurting her,
      he tried only to prevent her moving, and to get hold of the fist with the
      IOUs; but she wriggled like an eel in his arms with her supple, flexible
      body, struck him in the chest with her elbows, and scratched him, so that
      he could not help touching her all over, and was forced to hurt her and
      disregard her modesty.
    

      “How unusual this is! How strange!” he thought, utterly
      amazed, hardly able to believe his senses, and feeling rather sick from
      the scent of jasmine.
    

      In silence, breathing heavily, stumbling against the furniture, they moved
      about the room. Susanna was carried away by the struggle. She flushed,
      closed her eyes, and forgetting herself, once even pressed her face
      against the face of the lieutenant, so that there was a sweetish taste
      left on his lips. At last he caught hold of her clenched hand. . . .
      Forcing it open, and not finding the papers in it, he let go the Jewess.
      With flushed faces and dishevelled hair, they looked at one another,
      breathing hard. The spiteful, catlike expression on the Jewess’s
      face was gradually replaced by a good-natured smile. She burst out
      laughing, and turning on one foot, went towards the room where lunch was
      ready. The lieutenant moved slowly after her. She sat down to the table,
      and, still flushed and breathing hard, tossed off half a glass of port.
    

      “Listen”—the lieutenant broke the silence—“I
      hope you are joking?”
    

      “Not a bit of it,” she answered, thrusting a piece of bread
      into her mouth.
    

      “H’m! . . . How do you wish me to take all this?”
    

      “As you choose. Sit down and have lunch!”
    

      “But . . . it’s dishonest!”
    

      “Perhaps. But don’t trouble to give me a sermon; I have my own
      way of looking at things.”
    

      “Won’t you give them back?”
    

      “Of course not! If you were a poor unfortunate man, with nothing to
      eat, then it would be a different matter. But—he wants to get
      married!”
    

      “It’s not my money, you know; it’s my cousin’s!”
    

      “And what does your cousin want with money? To get fashionable
      clothes for his wife? But I really don’t care whether your belle-soeur
      has dresses or not.”
    

      The lieutenant had ceased to remember that he was in a strange house with
      an unknown lady, and did not trouble himself with decorum. He strode up
      and down the room, scowled and nervously fingered his waistcoat. The fact
      that the Jewess had lowered herself in his eyes by her dishonest action,
      made him feel bolder and more free-and-easy.
    

      “The devil knows what to make of it!” he muttered. “Listen.
      I shan’t go away from here until I get the IOUs!”
    

      “Ah, so much the better,” laughed Susanna. “If you stay
      here for good, it will make it livelier for me.”
    

      Excited by the struggle, the lieutenant looked at Susanna’s
      laughing, insolent face, at her munching mouth, at her heaving bosom, and
      grew bolder and more audacious. Instead of thinking about the IOU he began
      for some reason recalling with a sort of relish his cousin’s stories
      of the Jewess’s romantic adventures, of her free way of life, and
      these reminiscences only provoked him to greater audacity. Impulsively he
      sat down beside the Jewess and thinking no more of the IOUs began to eat.
      . . .
    

      “Will you have vodka or wine?” Susanna asked with a laugh.
      “So you will stay till you get the IOUs? Poor fellow! How many days
      and nights you will have to spend with me, waiting for those IOUs! Won’t
      your fiancÃ©e have something to say about it?”
    

      II
    

      Five hours had passed. The lieutenant’s cousin, Alexey Ivanovitch
      Kryukov was walking about the rooms of his country-house in his
      dressing-gown and slippers, and looking impatiently out of window. He was
      a tall, sturdy man, with a large black beard and a manly face; and as the
      Jewess had truly said, he was handsome, though he had reached the age when
      men are apt to grow too stout, puffy, and bald. By mind and temperament he
      was one of those natures in which the Russian intellectual classes are so
      rich: warm-hearted, good-natured, well-bred, having some knowledge of the
      arts and sciences, some faith, and the most chivalrous notions about
      honour, but indolent and lacking in depth. He was fond of good eating and
      drinking, was an ideal whist-player, was a connoisseur in women and
      horses, but in other things he was apathetic and sluggish as a seal, and
      to rouse him from his lethargy something extraordinary and quite revolting
      was needed, and then he would forget everything in the world and display
      intense activity; he would fume and talk of a duel, write a petition of
      seven pages to a Minister, gallop at breakneck speed about the district,
      call some one publicly “a scoundrel,” would go to law, and so
      on.
    

      “How is it our Sasha’s not back yet?” he kept asking his
      wife, glancing out of window. “Why, it’s dinner-time!”
    

      After waiting for the lieutenant till six o’clock, they sat down to
      dinner. When supper-time came, however, Alexey Ivanovitch was listening to
      every footstep, to every sound of the door, and kept shrugging his
      shoulders.
    

      “Strange!” he said. “The rascally dandy must have stayed
      on at the tenant’s.”
    

      As he went to bed after supper, Kryukov made up his mind that the
      lieutenant was being entertained at the tenant’s, where after a
      festive evening he was staying the night.
    

      Alexandr Grigoryevitch only returned next morning. He looked extremely
      crumpled and confused.
    

      “I want to speak to you alone . . .” he said mysteriously to
      his cousin.
    

      They went into the study. The lieutenant shut the door, and he paced for a
      long time up and down before he began to speak.
    

      “Something’s happened, my dear fellow,” he began,
      “that I don’t know how to tell you about. You wouldn’t
      believe it . . .”
    

      And blushing, faltering, not looking at his cousin, he told what had
      happened with the IOUs. Kryukov, standing with his feet wide apart and his
      head bent, listened and frowned.
    

      “Are you joking?” he asked.
    

      “How the devil could I be joking? It’s no joking matter!”
    

      “I don’t understand!” muttered Kryukov, turning crimson
      and flinging up his hands. “It’s positively . . . immoral on
      your part. Before your very eyes a hussy is up to the devil knows what, a
      serious crime, plays a nasty trick, and you go and kiss her!”
    

      “But I can’t understand myself how it happened!”
      whispered the lieutenant, bGlinking guiltily. “Upon my honour, I don’t
      understand it! It’s the first time in my life I’ve come across
      such a monster! It’s not her beauty that does for you, not her mind,
      but that . . . you understand . . . insolence, cynicism. . . .”
    

      “Insolence, cynicism . . . it’s unclean! If you’ve such
      a longing for insolence and cynicism, you might have picked a sow out of
      the mire and have devoured her alive. It would have been cheaper, anyway!
      Instead of two thousand three hundred!”
    

      “You do express yourself elegantly!” said the lieutenant,
      frowning. “I’ll pay you back the two thousand three hundred!”
    

      “I know you’ll pay it back, but it’s not a question of
      money! Damn the money! What revolts me is your being such a limp rag . . .
      such filthy feebleness! And engaged! With a fiancÃ©e!”
    

      “Don’t speak of it . . .” said the lieutenant, blushing.
      “I loathe myself as it is. I should like to sink into the earth. It’s
      sickening and vexatious that I shall have to bother my aunt for that five
      thousand. . . .”
    

      Kryukov continued for some time longer expressing his indignation and
      grumbling, then, as he grew calmer, he sat down on the sofa and began to
      jeer at his cousin.
    

      “You young officers!” he said with contemptuous irony. “Nice
      bridegrooms.”
    

      Suddenly he leapt up as though he had been stung, stamped his foot, and
      ran about the study.
    

      “No, I’m not going to leave it like that!” he said,
      shaking his fist. “I will have those IOUs, I will! I’ll give
      it her! One doesn’t beat women, but I’ll break every bone in
      her body. . . . I’ll pound her to a jelly! I’m not a
      lieutenant! You won’t touch me with insolence or cynicism! No-o-o,
      damn her! Mishka!” he shouted, “run and tell them to get the
      racing droshky out for me!”
    

      Kryukov dressed rapidly, and, without heeding the agitated lieutenant, got
      into the droshky, and with a wave of his hand resolutely raced off to
      Susanna Moiseyevna. For a long time the lieutenant gazed out of window at
      the clouds of dust that rolled after his cousin’s droshky,
      stretched, yawned, and went to his own room. A quarter of an hour later he
      was sound asleep.
    

      At six o’clock he was waked up and summoned to dinner.
    

      “How nice this is of Alexey!” his cousin’s wife greeted
      him in the dining-room. “He keeps us waiting for dinner.”
    

      “Do you mean to say he’s not come back yet?” yawned the
      lieutenant. “H’m! . . . he’s probably gone round to see
      the tenant.”
    

      But Alexey Ivanovitch was not back by supper either. His wife and Sokolsky
      decided that he was playing cards at the tenant’s and would most
      likely stay the night there. What had happened was not what they had
      supposed, however.
    

      Kryukov returned next morning, and without greeting any one, without a
      word, dashed into his study.
    

      “Well?” whispered the lieutenant, gazing at him round-eyed.
    

      Kryukov waved his hand and gave a snort.
    

      “Why, what’s the matter? What are you laughing at?”
    

      Kryukov flopped on the sofa, thrust his head in the pillow, and shook with
      suppressed laughter. A minute later he got up, and looking at the
      surprised lieutenant, with his eyes full of tears from laughing, said:
    

      “Close the door. Well . . . she is a fe-e-male, I beg to
      inform you!”
    

      “Did you get the IOUs?”
    

      Kryukov waved his hand and went off into a peal of laughter again.
    

      “Well! she is a female!” he went on. “Merci for
      the acquaintance, my boy! She’s a devil in petticoats. I arrived; I
      walked in like such an avenging Jove, you know, that I felt almost afraid
      of myself . . . . I frowned, I scowled, even clenched my fists to be more
      awe-inspiring. . . . ‘Jokes don’t pay with me, madam!’
      said I, and more in that style. And I threatened her with the law and with
      the Governor. To begin with she burst into tears, said she’d been
      joking with you, and even took me to the cupboard to give me the money.
      Then she began arguing that the future of Europe lies in the hands of the
      French, and the Russians, swore at women. . . . Like you, I listened,
      fascinated, ass that I was. . . . She kept singing the praises of my
      beauty, patted me on the arm near the shoulder, to see how strong I was,
      and . . . and as you see, I’ve only just got away from her! Ha, ha!
      She’s enthusiastic about you!”
    

      “You’re a nice fellow!” laughed the lieutenant. “A
      married man! highly respected. . . . Well, aren’t you ashamed?
      Disgusted? Joking apart though, old man, you’ve got your Queen
      Tamara in your own neighbourhood. . . .”
    

      “In my own neighbourhood! Why, you wouldn’t find another such
      chameleon in the whole of Russia! I’ve never seen anything like it
      in my life, though I know a good bit about women, too. I have known
      regular devils in my time, but I never met anything like this. It is, as
      you say, by insolence and cynicism she gets over you. What is so
      attractive in her is the diabolical suddenness, the quick transitions, the
      swift shifting hues. . . . Brrr! And the IOU— phew! Write it off for
      lost. We are both great sinners, we’ll go halves in our sin. I shall
      put down to you not two thousand three hundred, but half of it. Mind, tell
      my wife I was at the tenant’s.”
    

      Kryukov and the lieutenant buried their heads in the pillows, and broke
      into laughter; they raised their heads, glanced at one another, and again
      subsided into their pillows.
    

      “Engaged! A lieutenant!” Kryukov jeered.
    

      “Married!” retorted Sokolsky. “Highly respected! Father
      of a family!”
    

      At dinner they talked in veiled allusions, winked at one another, and, to
      the surprise of the others, were continually gushing with laughter into
      their dinner-napkins. After dinner, still in the best of spirits, they
      dressed up as Turks, and, running after one another with guns, played at
      soldiers with the children. In the evening they had a long argument. The
      lieutenant maintained that it was mean and contemptible to accept a dowry
      with your wife, even when there was passionate love on both sides. Kryukov
      thumped the table with his fists and declared that this was absurd, and
      that a husband who did not like his wife to have property of her own was
      an egoist and a despot. Both shouted, boiled over, did not understand each
      other, drank a good deal, and in the end, picking up the skirts of their
      dressing-gowns, went to their bedrooms. They soon fell asleep and slept
      soundly.
    

      Life went on as before, even, sluggish and free from sorrow. The shadows
      lay on the earth, thunder pealed from the clouds, from time to time the
      wind moaned plaintively, as though to prove that nature, too, could
      lament, but nothing troubled the habitual tranquillity of these people. Of
      Susanna Moiseyevna and the IOUs they said nothing. Both of them felt,
      somehow, ashamed to speak of the incident aloud. Yet they remembered it
      and thought of it with pleasure, as of a curious farce, which life had
      unexpectedly and casually played upon them, and which it would be pleasant
      to recall in old age.
    

      On the sixth or seventh day after his visit to the Jewess, Kryukov was
      sitting in his study in the morning writing a congratulatory letter to his
      aunt. Alexandr Grigoryevitch was walking to and fro near the table in
      silence. The lieutenant had slept badly that night; he woke up depressed,
      and now he felt bored. He paced up and down, thinking of the end of his
      furlough, of his fiancÃ©e, who was expecting him, of how people could live
      all their lives in the country without feeling bored. Standing at the
      window, for a long time he stared at the trees, smoked three cigarettes
      one after another, and suddenly turned to his cousin.
    

      “I have a favour to ask you, Alyosha,” he said. “Let me
      have a saddle-horse for the day. . . .”
    

      Kryukov looked searchingly at him and continued his writing with a frown.
    

      “You will, then?” asked the lieutenant.
    

      Kryukov looked at him again, then deliberately drew out a drawer in the
      table, and taking out a thick roll of notes, gave it to his cousin.
    

      “Here’s five thousand . . .” he said. “Though it’s
      not my money, yet, God bless you, it’s all the same. I advise you to
      send for post-horses at once and go away. Yes, really!”
    

      The lieutenant in his turn looked searchingly at Kryukov and laughed.
    

      “You’ve guessed right, Alyosha,” he said, reddening.
      “It was to her I meant to ride. Yesterday evening when the
      washerwoman gave me that damned tunic, the one I was wearing then, and it
      smelt of jasmine, why . . . I felt I must go!”
    

      “You must go away.”
    

      “Yes, certainly. And my furlough’s just over. I really will go
      to-day! Yes, by Jove! However long one stays, one has to go in the end. .
      . . I’m going!”
    

      The post-horses were brought after dinner the same day; the lieutenant
      said good-bye to the Kryukovs and set off, followed by their good wishes.
    

      Another week passed. It was a dull but hot and heavy day. From early
      morning Kryukov walked aimlessly about the house, looking out of window,
      or turning over the leaves of albums, though he was sick of the sight of
      them already. When he came across his wife or children, he began grumbling
      crossly. It seemed to him, for some reason that day, that his children’s
      manners were revolting, that his wife did not know how to look after the
      servants, that their expenditure was quite disproportionate to their
      income. All this meant that “the master” was out of humour.
    

      After dinner, Kryukov, feeling dissatisfied with the soup and the roast
      meat he had eaten, ordered out his racing droshky. He drove slowly out of
      the courtyard, drove at a walking pace for a quarter of a mile, and
      stopped.
    

      “Shall I . . . drive to her . . . that devil?” he thought,
      looking at the leaden sky.
    

      And Kryukov positively laughed, as though it were the first time that day
      he had asked himself that question. At once the load of boredom was lifted
      from his heart, and there rose a gleam of pleasure in his lazy eyes. He
      lashed the horse. . . .
    

      All the way his imagination was picturing how surprised the Jewess would
      be to see him, how he would laugh and chat, and come home feeling
      refreshed. . . .
    

      “Once a month one needs something to brighten one up . . . something
      out of the common round,” he thought, “something that would
      give the stagnant organism a good shaking up, a reaction . . . whether it’s
      a drinking bout, or . . . Susanna. One can’t get on without it.”
    

      It was getting dark when he drove into the yard of the vodka distillery.
      From the open windows of the owner’s house came sounds of laughter
      and singing:
    

      “‘Brighter than lightning, more burning than flame. . . .’”
    

      sang a powerful, mellow, bass voice.
    

      “Aha! she has visitors,” thought Kryukov.
    

      And he was annoyed that she had visitors.
    

      “Shall I go back?” he thought with his hand on the bell, but
      he rang all the same, and went up the familiar staircase. From the entry
      he glanced into the reception hall. There were about five men there—all
      landowners and officials of his acquaintance; one, a tall, thin gentleman,
      was sitting at the piano, singing, and striking the keys with his long,
      thin fingers. The others were listening and grinning with enjoyment.
      Kryukov looked himself up and down in the looking-glass, and was about to
      go into the hall, when Susanna Moiseyevna herself darted into the entry,
      in high spirits and wearing the same black dress. . . . Seeing Kryukov,
      she was petrified for an instant, then she uttered a little scream and
      beamed with delight.
    

      “Is it you?” she said, clutching his hand. “What a
      surprise!”
    

      “Here she is!” smiled Kryukov, putting his arm round her
      waist. “Well! Does the destiny of Europe still lie in the hands of
      the French and the Russians?”
    

      “I’m so glad,” laughed the Jewess, cautiously removing
      his arm. “Come, go into the hall; they’re all friends there. .
      . . I’ll go and tell them to bring you some tea. Your name’s
      Alexey, isn’t it? Well, go in, I’ll come directly. . . .”
    

      She blew him a kiss and ran out of the entry, leaving behind her the same
      sickly smell of jasmine. Kryukov raised his head and walked into the hall.
      He was on terms of friendly intimacy with all the men in the room, but
      scarcely nodded to them; they, too, scarcely responded, as though the
      places in which they met were not quite decent, and as though they were in
      tacit agreement with one another that it was more suitable for them not to
      recognise one another.
    

      From the hall Kryukov walked into the drawing-room, and from it into a
      second drawing-room. On the way he met three or four other guests, also
      men whom he knew, though they barely recognised him. Their faces were
      flushed with drink and merriment. Alexey Ivanovitch glanced furtively at
      them and marvelled that these men, respectable heads of families, who had
      known sorrow and privation, could demean themselves to such pitiful, cheap
      gaiety! He shrugged his shoulders, smiled, and walked on.
    

      “There are places,” he reflected, “where a sober man
      feels sick, and a drunken man rejoices. I remember I never could go to the
      operetta or the gipsies when I was sober: wine makes a man more
      good-natured and reconciles him with vice. . . .”
    

      Suddenly he stood still, petrified, and caught hold of the door-post with
      both hands. At the writing-table in Susanna’s study was sitting
      Lieutenant Alexandr Grigoryevitch. He was discussing something in an
      undertone with a fat, flabby-looking Jew, and seeing his cousin, flushed
      crimson and looked down at an album.
    

      The sense of decency was stirred in Kryukov and the blood rushed to his
      head. Overwhelmed with amazement, shame, and anger, he walked up to the
      table without a word. Sokolsky’s head sank lower than ever. His face
      worked with an expression of agonising shame.
    

      “Ah, it’s you, Alyosha!” he articulated, making a
      desperate effort to raise his eyes and to smile. “I called here to
      say good-bye, and, as you see. . . . But to-morrow I am certainly going.”
    

      “What can I say to him? What?” thought Alexey Ivanovitch.
      “How can I judge him since I’m here myself?”
    

      And clearing his throat without uttering a word, he went out slowly.
    

      “‘Call her not heavenly, and leave her on earth. . . .’”
    

      The bass was singing in the hall. A little while after, Kryukov’s
      racing droshky was bumping along the dusty road.
    











      NEIGHBOURS
    

PYOTR MIHALITCH
      IVASHIN was very much out of humour: his sister, a young girl, had gone
      away to live with Vlassitch, a married man. To shake off the despondency
      and depression which pursued him at home and in the fields, he called to
      his aid his sense of justice, his genuine and noble ideas—he had
      always defended free-love! —but this was of no avail, and he always
      came back to the same conclusion as their foolish old nurse, that his
      sister had acted wrongly and that Vlassitch had abducted his sister. And
      that was distressing.
    

      His mother did not leave her room all day long; the old nurse kept sighing
      and speaking in whispers; his aunt had been on the point of taking her
      departure every day, and her trunks were continually being brought down to
      the hall and carried up again to her room. In the house, in the yard, and
      in the garden it was as still as though there were some one dead in the
      house. His aunt, the servants, and even the peasants, so it seemed to
      Pyotr Mihalitch, looked at him enigmatically and with perplexity, as
      though they wanted to say “Your sister has been seduced; why are you
      doing nothing?” And he reproached himself for inactivity, though he
      did not know precisely what action he ought to have taken.
    

      So passed six days. On the seventh—it was Sunday afternoon—a
      messenger on horseback brought a letter. The address was in a familiar
      feminine handwriting: “Her Excy. Anna Nikolaevna Ivashin.”
      Pyotr Mihalitch fancied that there was something defiant, provocative, in
      the handwriting and in the abbreviation “Excy.” And advanced
      ideas in women are obstinate, ruthless, cruel.
    

      “She’d rather die than make any concession to her unhappy
      mother, or beg her forgiveness,” thought Pyotr Mihalitch, as he went
      to his mother with the letter.
    

      His mother was lying on her bed, dressed. Seeing her son, she rose
      impulsively, and straightening her grey hair, which had fallen from under
      her cap, asked quickly:
    

      “What is it? What is it?”
    

      “This has come . . .” said her son, giving her the letter.
    

      Zina’s name, and even the pronoun “she” was not uttered
      in the house. Zina was spoken of impersonally: “this has come,”
      “Gone away,” and so on. . . . The mother recognised her
      daughter’s handwriting, and her face grew ugly and unpleasant, and
      her grey hair escaped again from her cap.
    

      “No!” she said, with a motion of her hands, as though the
      letter scorched her fingers. “No, no, never! Nothing would induce
      me!”
    

      The mother broke into hysterical sobs of grief and shame; she evidently
      longed to read the letter, but her pride prevented her. Pyotr Mihalitch
      realised that he ought to open the letter himself and read it aloud, but
      he was overcome by anger such as he had never felt before; he ran out into
      the yard and shouted to the messenger:
    

      “Say there will be no answer! There will be no answer! Tell them
      that, you beast!”
    

      And he tore up the letter; then tears came into his eyes, and feeling that
      he was cruel, miserable, and to blame, he went out into the fields.
    

      He was only twenty-seven, but he was already stout. He dressed like an old
      man in loose, roomy clothes, and suffered from asthma. He already seemed
      to be developing the characteristics of an elderly country bachelor. He
      never fell in love, never thought of marriage, and loved no one but his
      mother, his sister, his old nurse, and the gardener, Vassilitch. He was
      fond of good fare, of his nap after dinner, and of talking about politics
      and exalted subjects. He had in his day taken his degree at the
      university, but he now looked upon his studies as though in them he had
      discharged a duty incumbent upon young men between the ages of eighteen
      and twenty-five; at any rate, the ideas which now strayed every day
      through his mind had nothing in common with the university or the subjects
      he had studied there.
    

      In the fields it was hot and still, as though rain were coming. It was
      steaming in the wood, and there was a heavy fragrant scent from the pines
      and rotting leaves. Pyotr Mihalitch stopped several times and wiped his
      wet brow. He looked at his winter corn and his spring oats, walked round
      the clover-field, and twice drove away a partridge with its chicks which
      had strayed in from the wood. And all the while he was thinking that this
      insufferable state of things could not go on for ever, and that he must
      end it one way or another. End it stupidly, madly, but he must end it.
    

      “But how? What can I do?” he asked himself, and looked
      imploringly at the sky and at the trees, as though begging for their help.
    

      But the sky and the trees were mute. His noble ideas were no help, and his
      common sense whispered that the agonising question could have no solution
      but a stupid one, and that to-day’s scene with the messenger was not
      the last one of its kind. It was terrible to think what was in store for
      him!
    

      As he returned home the sun was setting. By now it seemed to him that the
      problem was incapable of solution. He could not accept the accomplished
      fact, and he could not refuse to accept it, and there was no intermediate
      course. When, taking off his hat and fanning himself with his
      handkerchief, he was walking along the road, and had only another mile and
      a half to go before he would reach home, he heard bells behind him. It was
      a very choice and successful combination of bells, which gave a clear
      crystal note. No one had such bells on his horses but the police captain,
      Medovsky, formerly an officer in the hussars, a man in broken-down health,
      who had been a great rake and spendthrift, and was a distant relation of
      Pyotr Mihalitch. He was like one of the family at the Ivashins’ and
      had a tender, fatherly affection for Zina, as well as a great admiration
      for her.
    

      “I was coming to see you,” he said, overtaking Pyotr
      Mihalitch. “Get in; I’ll give you a lift.”
    

      He was smiling and looked cheerful. Evidently he did not yet know that
      Zina had gone to live with Vlassitch; perhaps he had been told of it
      already, but did not believe it. Pyotr Mihalitch felt in a difficult
      position.
    

      “You are very welcome,” he muttered, blushing till the tears
      came into his eyes, and not knowing how to lie or what to say. “I am
      delighted,” he went on, trying to smile, “but . . . Zina is
      away and mother is ill.”
    

      “How annoying!” said the police captain, looking pensively at
      Pyotr Mihalitch. “And I was meaning to spend the evening with you.
      Where has Zinaida Mihalovna gone?”
    

      “To the Sinitskys’, and I believe she meant to go from there
      to the monastery. I don’t quite know.”
    

      The police captain talked a little longer and then turned back. Pyotr
      Mihalitch walked home, and thought with horror what the police captain’s
      feelings would be when he learned the truth. And Pyotr Mihalitch imagined
      his feelings, and actually experiencing them himself, went into the house.
    

      “Lord help us,” he thought, “Lord help us!”
    

      At evening tea the only one at the table was his aunt. As usual, her face
      wore the expression that seemed to say that though she was a weak,
      defenceless woman, she would allow no one to insult her. Pyotr Mihalitch
      sat down at the other end of the table (he did not like his aunt) and
      began drinking tea in silence.
    

      “Your mother has had no dinner again to-day,” said his aunt.
      “You ought to do something about it, Petrusha. Starving oneself is
      no help in sorrow.”
    

      It struck Pyotr Mihalitch as absurd that his aunt should meddle in other
      people’s business and should make her departure depend on Zina’s
      having gone away. He was tempted to say something rude to her, but
      restrained himself. And as he restrained himself he felt the time had come
      for action, and that he could not bear it any longer. Either he must act
      at once or fall on the ground, and scream and bang his head upon the
      floor. He pictured Vlassitch and Zina, both of them progressive and
      self-satisfied, kissing each other somewhere under a maple tree, and all
      the anger and bitterness that had been accumulating in him for the last
      seven days fastened upon Vlassitch.
    

      “One has seduced and abducted my sister,” he thought, “another
      will come and murder my mother, a third will set fire to the house and
      sack the place. . . . And all this under the mask of friendship, lofty
      ideas, unhappiness!”
    

      “No, it shall not be!” Pyotr Mihalitch cried suddenly, and he
      brought his fist down on the table.
    

      He jumped up and ran out of the dining-room. In the stable the steward’s
      horse was standing ready saddled. He got on it and galloped off to
      Vlassitch.
    

      There was a perfect tempest within him. He felt a longing to do something
      extraordinary, startling, even if he had to repent of it all his life
      afterwards. Should he call Vlassitch a blackguard, slap him in the face,
      and then challenge him to a duel? But Vlassitch was not one of those men
      who do fight duels; being called a blackguard and slapped in the face
      would only make him more unhappy, and would make him shrink into himself
      more than ever. These unhappy, defenceless people are the most
      insufferable, the most tiresome creatures in the world. They can do
      anything with impunity. When the luckless man responds to well-deserved
      reproach by looking at you with eyes full of deep and guilty feeling, and
      with a sickly smile bends his head submissively, even justice itself could
      not lift its hand against him.
    

      “No matter. I’ll horsewhip him before her eyes and tell him
      what I think of him,” Pyotr Mihalitch decided.
    

      He was riding through his wood and waste land, and he imagined Zina would
      try to justify her conduct by talking about the rights of women and
      individual freedom, and about there being no difference between legal
      marriage and free union. Like a woman, she would argue about what she did
      not understand. And very likely at the end she would ask, “How do
      you come in? What right have you to interfere?”
    

      “No, I have no right,” muttered Pyotr Mihalitch. “But so
      much the better. . . . The harsher I am, the less right I have to
      interfere, the better.”
    

      It was sultry. Clouds of gnats hung over the ground and in the waste
      places the peewits called plaintively. Everything betokened rain, but he
      could not see a cloud in the sky. Pyotr Mihalitch crossed the boundary of
      his estate and galloped over a smooth, level field. He often went along
      this road and knew every bush, every hollow in it. What now in the far
      distance looked in the dusk like a dark cliff was a red church; he could
      picture it all down to the smallest detail, even the plaster on the gate
      and the calves that were always grazing in the church enclosure.
      Three-quarters of a mile to the right of the church there was a copse like
      a dark blur—it was Count Koltonovitch’s. And beyond the church
      Vlassitch’s estate began.
    

      From behind the church and the count’s copse a huge black
      storm-cloud was rising, and there were ashes of white lightning.
    

      “Here it is!” thought Pyotr Mihalitch. “Lord help us,
      Lord help us!”
    

      The horse was soon tired after its quick gallop, and Pyotr Mihalitch was
      tired too. The storm-cloud looked at him angrily and seemed to advise him
      to go home. He felt a little scared.
    

      “I will prove to them they are wrong,” he tried to reassure
      himself. “They will say that it is free-love, individual freedom;
      but freedom means self-control and not subjection to passion. It’s
      not liberty but license!”
    

      He reached the count’s big pond; it looked dark blue and frowning
      under the cloud, and a smell of damp and slime rose from it. Near the dam,
      two willows, one old and one young, drooped tenderly towards one another.
      Pyotr Mihalitch and Vlassitch had been walking near this very spot only a
      fortnight before, humming a students’ song:
    

      “‘Youth is wasted, life is nought, when the heart is cold and
      loveless.’”
    

      A wretched song!
    

      It was thundering as Pyotr Mihalitch rode through the copse, and the trees
      were bending and rustling in the wind. He had to make haste. It was only
      three-quarters of a mile through a meadow from the copse to Vlassitch’s
      house. Here there were old birch-trees on each side of the road. They had
      the same melancholy and unhappy air as their owner Vlassitch, and looked
      as tall and lanky as he. Big drops of rain pattered on the birches and on
      the grass; the wind had suddenly dropped, and there was a smell of wet
      earth and poplars. Before him he saw Vlassitch’s fence with a row of
      yellow acacias, which were tall and lanky too; where the fence was broken
      he could see the neglected orchard.
    

      Pyotr Mihalitch was not thinking now of the horsewhip or of a slap in the
      face, and did not know what he would do at Vlassitch’s. He felt
      nervous. He felt frightened on his own account and on his sister’s,
      and was terrified at the thought of seeing her. How would she behave with
      her brother? What would they both talk about? And had he not better go
      back before it was too late? As he made these reflections, he galloped up
      the avenue of lime-trees to the house, rode round the big clumps of
      lilacs, and suddenly saw Vlassitch.
    

      Vlassitch, wearing a cotton shirt, and top-boots, bending forward, with no
      hat on in the rain, was coming from the corner of the house to the front
      door. He was followed by a workman with a hammer and a box of nails. They
      must have been mending a shutter which had been banging in the wind.
      Seeing Pyotr Mihalitch, Vlassitch stopped.
    

      “It’s you!” he said, smiling. “That’s nice.”
    

      “Yes, I’ve come, as you see,” said Pyotr Mihalitch,
      brushing the rain off himself with both hands.
    

      “Well, that’s capital! I’m very glad,” said
      Vlassitch, but he did not hold out his hand: evidently he did not venture,
      but waited for Pyotr Mihalitch to hold out his. “It will do the oats
      good,” he said, looking at the sky.
    

      “Yes.”
    

      They went into the house in silence. To the right of the hall was a door
      leading to another hall and then to the drawing-room, and on the left was
      a little room which in winter was used by the steward. Pyotr Mihalitch and
      Vlassitch went into this little room.
    

      “Where were you caught in the rain?”
    

      “Not far off, quite close to the house.”
    

      Pyotr Mihalitch sat down on the bed. He was glad of the noise of the rain
      and the darkness of the room. It was better: it made it less dreadful, and
      there was no need to see his companion’s face. There was no anger in
      his heart now, nothing but fear and vexation with himself. He felt he had
      made a bad beginning, and that nothing would come of this visit.
    

      Both were silent for some time and affected to be listening to the rain.
    

      “Thank you, Petrusha,” Vlassitch began, clearing his throat.
      “I am very grateful to you for coming. It’s generous and noble
      of you. I understand it, and, believe me, I appreciate it. Believe me.”
    

      He looked out of the window and went on, standing in the middle of the
      room:
    

      “Everything happened so secretly, as though we were concealing it
      all from you. The feeling that you might be wounded and angry has been a
      blot on our happiness all these days. But let me justify myself. We kept
      it secret not because we did not trust you. To begin with, it all happened
      suddenly, by a kind of inspiration; there was no time to discuss it.
      Besides, it’s such a private, delicate matter, and it was awkward to
      bring a third person in, even some one as intimate as you. Above all, in
      all this we reckoned on your generosity. You are a very noble and generous
      person. I am infinitely grateful to you. If you ever need my life, come
      and take it.”
    

      Vlassitch talked in a quiet, hollow bass, always on the same droning note;
      he was evidently agitated. Pyotr Mihalitch felt it was his turn to speak,
      and that to listen and keep silent would really mean playing the part of a
      generous and noble simpleton, and that had not been his idea in coming. He
      got up quickly and said, breathlessly in an undertone:
    

      “Listen, Grigory. You know I liked you and could have desired no
      better husband for my sister; but what has happened is awful! It’s
      terrible to think of it!”
    

      “Why is it terrible?” asked Vlassitch, with a quiver in his
      voice. “It would be terrible if we had done wrong, but that isn’t
      so.”
    

      “Listen, Grigory. You know I have no prejudices; but, excuse my
      frankness, to my mind you have both acted selfishly. Of course, I shan’t
      say so to my sister—it will distress her; but you ought to know:
      mother is miserable beyond all description.”
    

      “Yes, that’s sad,” sighed Vlassitch. “We foresaw
      that, Petrusha, but what could we have done? Because one’s actions
      hurt other people, it doesn’t prove that they are wrong. What’s
      to be done! Every important step one takes is bound to distress somebody.
      If you went to fight for freedom, that would distress your mother, too.
      What’s to be done! Any one who puts the peace of his family before
      everything has to renounce the life of ideas completely.”
    

      There was a vivid flash of lightning at the window, and the lightning
      seemed to change the course of Vlassitch’s thoughts. He sat down
      beside Pyotr Mihalitch and began saying what was utterly beside the point.
    

      “I have such a reverence for your sister, Petrusha,” he said.
      “When I used to come and see you, I felt as though I were going to a
      holy shrine, and I really did worship Zina. Now my reverence for her grows
      every day. For me she is something higher than a wife—yes, higher!”
      Vlassitch waved his hands. “She is my holy of holies. Since she is
      living with me, I enter my house as though it were a temple. She is an
      extraordinary, rare, most noble woman!”
    

      “Well, he’s off now!” thought Pyotr Mihalitch; he
      disliked the word “woman.”
    

      “Why shouldn’t you be married properly?” he asked.
      “How much does your wife want for a divorce?”
    

      “Seventy-five thousand.”
    

      “It’s rather a lot. But if we were to negotiate with her?”
    

      “She won’t take a farthing less. She is an awful woman,
      brother,” sighed Vlassitch. “I’ve never talked to you
      about her before—it was unpleasant to think of her; but now that the
      subject has come up, I’ll tell you about her. I married her on the
      impulse of the moment—a fine, honourable impulse. An officer in
      command of a battalion of our regiment—if you care to hear the
      details—had an affair with a girl of eighteen; that is, to put it
      plainly, he seduced her, lived with her for two months, and abandoned her.
      She was in an awful position, brother. She was ashamed to go home to her
      parents; besides, they wouldn’t have received her. Her lover had
      abandoned her; there was nothing left for her but to go to the barracks
      and sell herself. The other officers in the regiment were indignant. They
      were by no means saints themselves, but the baseness of it was so
      striking. Besides, no one in the regiment could endure the man. And to
      spite him, you understand, the indignant lieutenants and ensigns began
      getting up a subscription for the unfortunate girl. And when we subalterns
      met together and began to subscribe five or ten roubles each, I had a
      sudden inspiration. I felt it was an opportunity to do something fine. I
      hastened to the girl and warmly expressed my sympathy. And while I was on
      my way to her, and while I was talking to her, I loved her fervently as a
      woman insulted and injured. Yes. . . . Well, a week later I made her an
      offer. The colonel and my comrades thought my marriage out of keeping with
      the dignity of an officer. That roused me more than ever. I wrote a long
      letter, do you know, in which I proved that my action ought to be
      inscribed in the annals of the regiment in letters of gold, and so on. I
      sent the letter to my colonel and copies to my comrades. Well, I was
      excited, and, of course, I could not avoid being rude. I was asked to
      leave the regiment. I have a rough copy of it put away somewhere; I’ll
      give it to you to read sometime. It was written with great feeling. You
      will see what lofty and noble sentiments I was experiencing. I resigned my
      commission and came here with my wife. My father had left a few debts, I
      had no money, and from the first day my wife began making acquaintances,
      dressing herself smartly, and playing cards, and I was obliged to mortgage
      the estate. She led a bad life, you understand, and you are the only one
      of the neighbours who hasn’t been her lover. After two years I gave
      her all I had to set me free and she went off to town. Yes. . . . And now
      I pay her twelve hundred roubles a year. She is an awful woman! There is a
      fly, brother, which lays an egg in the back of a spider so that the spider
      can’t shake it off: the grub fastens upon the spider and drinks its
      heart’s blood. That was how this woman fastened upon me and sucks
      the blood of my heart. She hates and despises me for being so stupid; that
      is, for marrying a woman like her. My chivalry seems to her despicable.
      ‘A wise man cast me off,’ she says, ‘and a fool picked
      me up.’ To her thinking no one but a pitiful idiot could have
      behaved as I did. And that is insufferably bitter to me, brother.
      Altogether, I may say in parenthesis, fate has been hard upon me, very
      hard.”
    

      Pyotr Mihalitch listened to Vlassitch and wondered in perplexity what it
      was in this man that had so charmed his sister. He was not young—he
      was forty-one—lean and lanky, narrow-chested, with a long nose, and
      grey hairs in his beard. He talked in a droning voice, had a sickly smile,
      and waved his hands awkwardly as he talked. He had neither health, nor
      pleasant, manly manners, nor savoir-faire, nor gaiety, and in all
      his exterior there was something colourless and indefinite. He dressed
      without taste, his surroundings were depressing, he did not care for
      poetry or painting because “they have no answer to give to the
      questions of the day” —that is, he did not understand them;
      music did not touch him. He was a poor farmer.
    

      His estate was in a wretched condition and was mortgaged; he was paying
      twelve percent on the second mortgage and owed ten thousand on personal
      securities as well. When the time came to pay the interest on the mortgage
      or to send money to his wife, he asked every one to lend him money with as
      much agitation as though his house were on fire, and, at the same time
      losing his head, he would sell the whole of his winter store of fuel for
      five roubles and a stack of straw for three roubles, and then have his
      garden fence or old cucumber-frames chopped up to heat his stoves. His
      meadows were ruined by pigs, the peasants’ cattle strayed in the
      undergrowth in his woods, and every year the old trees were fewer and
      fewer: beehives and rusty pails lay about in his garden and
      kitchen-garden. He had neither talents nor abilities, nor even ordinary
      capacity for living like other people. In practical life he was a weak,
      naÃ¯ve man, easy to deceive and to cheat, and the peasants with good reason
      called him “simple.”
    

      He was a Liberal, and in the district was regarded as a “Red,”
      but even his progressiveness was a bore. There was no originality nor
      moving power about his independent views: he was revolted, indignant, and
      delighted always on the same note; it was always spiritless and
      ineffective. Even in moments of strong enthusiasm he never raised his head
      or stood upright. But the most tiresome thing of all was that he managed
      to express even his best and finest ideas so that they seemed in him
      commonplace and out of date. It reminded one of something old one had read
      long ago, when slowly and with an air of profundity he would begin
      discoursing of his noble, lofty moments, of his best years; or when he
      went into raptures over the younger generation, which has always been, and
      still is, in advance of society; or abused Russians for donning their
      dressing-gowns at thirty and forgetting the principles of their alma
      mater. If you stayed the night with him, he would put Pissarev or
      Darwin on your bedroom table; if you said you had read it, he would go and
      bring Dobrolubov.
    

      In the district this was called free-thinking, and many people looked upon
      this free-thinking as an innocent and harmless eccentricity; it made him
      profoundly unhappy, however. It was for him the maggot of which he had
      just been speaking; it had fastened upon him and was sucking his
      life-blood. In his past there had been the strange marriage in the style
      of Dostoevsky; long letters and copies written in a bad, unintelligible
      hand-writing, but with great feeling, endless misunderstandings,
      explanations, disappointments, then debts, a second mortgage, the
      allowance to his wife, the monthly borrowing of money—and all this
      for no benefit to any one, either himself or others. And in the present,
      as in the past, he was still in a nervous flurry, on the lookout for
      heroic actions, and poking his nose into other people’s affairs; as
      before, at every favourable opportunity there were long letters and
      copies, wearisome, stereotyped conversations about the village community,
      or the revival of handicrafts or the establishment of cheese factories—conversations
      as like one another as though he had prepared them, not in his living
      brain, but by some mechanical process. And finally this scandal with Zina
      of which one could not see the end!
    

      And meanwhile Zina was young—she was only twenty-two—good-looking,
      elegant, gay; she was fond of laughing, chatter, argument, a passionate
      musician; she had good taste in dress, in furniture, in books, and in her
      own home she would not have put up with a room like this, smelling of
      boots and cheap vodka. She, too, had advanced ideas, but in her
      free-thinking one felt the overflow of energy, the vanity of a young,
      strong, spirited girl, passionately eager to be better and more original
      than others. . . . How had it happened that she had fallen in love with
      Vlassitch?
    

      “He is a Quixote, an obstinate fanatic, a maniac,” thought
      Pyotr Mihalitch, “and she is as soft, yielding, and weak in
      character as I am. . . . She and I give in easily, without resistance. She
      loves him; but, then, I, too, love him in spite of everything.”
    

      Pyotr Mihalitch considered Vlassitch a good, straightforward man, but
      narrow and one-sided. In his perturbations and his sufferings, and in fact
      in his whole life, he saw no lofty aims, remote or immediate; he saw
      nothing but boredom and incapacity for life. His self-sacrifice and all
      that Vlassitch himself called heroic actions or noble impulses seemed to
      him a useless waste of force, unnecessary blank shots which consumed a
      great deal of powder. And Vlassitch’s fanatical belief in the
      extraordinary loftiness and faultlessness of his own way of thinking
      struck him as naÃ¯ve and even morbid; and the fact that Vlassitch all his
      life had contrived to mix the trivial with the exalted, that he had made a
      stupid marriage and looked upon it as an act of heroism, and then had
      affairs with other women and regarded that as a triumph of some idea or
      other was simply incomprehensible.
    

      Nevertheless, Pyotr Mihalitch was fond of Vlassitch; he was conscious of a
      sort of power in him, and for some reason he had never had the heart to
      contradict him.
    

      Vlassitch sat down quite close to him for a talk in the dark, to the
      accompaniment of the rain, and he had cleared his throat as a prelude to
      beginning on something lengthy, such as the history of his marriage. But
      it was intolerable for Pyotr Mihalitch to listen to him; he was tormented
      by the thought that he would see his sister directly.
    

      “Yes, you’ve had bad luck,” he said gently; “but,
      excuse me, we’ve been wandering from the point. That’s not
      what we are talking about.”
    

      “Yes, yes, quite so. Well, let us come back to the point,”
      said Vlassitch, and he stood up. “I tell you, Petrusha, our
      conscience is clear. We are not married, but there is no need for me to
      prove to you that our marriage is perfectly legitimate. You are as free in
      your ideas as I am, and, happily, there can be no disagreement between us
      on that point. As for our future, that ought not to alarm you. I’ll
      work in the sweat of my brow, I’ll work day and night— in
      fact, I will strain every nerve to make Zina happy. Her life will be a
      splendid one! You may ask, am I able to do it. I am, brother! When a man
      devotes every minute to one thought, it’s not difficult for him to
      attain his object. But let us go to Zina; it will be a joy to her to see
      you.”
    

      Pyotr Mihalitch’s heart began to beat. He got up and followed
      Vlassitch into the hall, and from there into the drawing-room. There was
      nothing in the huge gloomy room but a piano and a long row of old chairs
      ornamented with bronze, on which no one ever sat. There was a candle
      alight on the piano. From the drawing-room they went in silence into the
      dining-room. This room, too, was large and comfortless; in the middle of
      the room there was a round table with two leaves with six thick legs, and
      only one candle. A clock in a large mahogany case like an ikon stand
      pointed to half-past two.
    

      Vlassitch opened the door into the next room and said:
    

      “Zina, here is Petrusha come to see us!”
    

      At once there was the sound of hurried footsteps and Zina came into the
      dining-room. She was tall, plump, and very pale, and, just as when he had
      seen her for the last time at home, she was wearing a black skirt and a
      red blouse, with a large buckle on her belt. She flung one arm round her
      brother and kissed him on the temple.
    

      “What a storm!” she said. “Grigory went off somewhere
      and I was left quite alone in the house.”
    

      She was not embarrassed, and looked at her brother as frankly and candidly
      as at home; looking at her, Pyotr Mihalitch, too, lost his embarrassment.
    

      “But you are not afraid of storms,” he said, sitting down at
      the table.
    

      “No,” she said, “but here the rooms are so big, the
      house is so old, and when there is thunder it all rattles like a cupboard
      full of crockery. It’s a charming house altogether,” she went
      on, sitting down opposite her brother. “There’s some pleasant
      memory in every room. In my room, only fancy, Grigory’s grandfather
      shot himself.”
    

      “In August we shall have the money to do up the lodge in the garden,”
      said Vlassitch.
    

      “For some reason when it thunders I think of that grandfather,”
      Zina went on. “And in this dining-room somebody was flogged to
      death.”
    

      “That’s an actual fact,” said Vlassitch, and he looked
      with wide-open eyes at Pyotr Mihalitch. “Sometime in the forties
      this place was let to a Frenchman called Olivier. The portrait of his
      daughter is lying in an attic now—a very pretty girl. This Olivier,
      so my father told me, despised Russians for their ignorance and treated
      them with cruel derision. Thus, for instance, he insisted on the priest
      walking without his hat for half a mile round his house, and on the church
      bells being rung when the Olivier family drove through the village. The
      serfs and altogether the humble of this world, of course, he treated with
      even less ceremony. Once there came along this road one of the
      simple-hearted sons of wandering Russia, somewhat after the style of Gogol’s
      divinity student, Homa Brut. He asked for a night’s lodging, pleased
      the bailiffs, and was given a job at the office of the estate. There are
      many variations of the story. Some say the divinity student stirred up the
      peasants, others that Olivier’ s daughter fell in love with him. I
      don’t know which is true, only one fine evening Olivier called him
      in here and cross-examined him, then ordered him to be beaten. Do you
      know, he sat here at this table drinking claret while the stable-boys beat
      the man. He must have tried to wring something out of him. Towards morning
      the divinity student died of the torture and his body was hidden. They say
      it was thrown into Koltovitch’s pond. There was an inquiry, but the
      Frenchman paid some thousands to some one in authority and went away to
      Alsace. His lease was up just then, and so the matter ended.”
    

      “What scoundrels!” said Zina, shuddering.
    

      “My father remembered Olivier and his daughter well. He used to say
      she was remarkably beautiful and eccentric. I imagine the divinity student
      had done both—stirred up the peasants and won the daughter’s
      heart. Perhaps he wasn’t a divinity student at all, but some one
      travelling incognito.”
    

      Zina grew thoughtful; the story of the divinity student and the beautiful
      French girl had evidently carried her imagination far away. It seemed to
      Pyotr Mihalitch that she had not changed in the least during the last
      week, except that she was a little paler. She looked calm and just as
      usual, as though she had come with her brother to visit Vlassitch. But
      Pyotr Mihalitch felt that some change had taken place in himself. Before,
      when she was living at home, he could have spoken to her about anything,
      and now he did not feel equal to asking her the simple question, “How
      do you like being here?” The question seemed awkward and
      unnecessary. Probably the same change had taken place in her. She was in
      no haste to turn the conversation to her mother, to her home, to her
      relations with Vlassitch; she did not defend herself, she did not say that
      free unions are better than marriages in the church; she was not agitated,
      and calmly brooded over the story of Olivier. . . . And why had they
      suddenly begun talking of Olivier?
    

      “You are both of you wet with the rain,” said Zina, and she
      smiled joyfully; she was touched by this point of resemblance between her
      brother and Vlassitch.
    

      And Pyotr Mihalitch felt all the bitterness and horror of his position. He
      thought of his deserted home, the closed piano, and Zina’s bright
      little room into which no one went now; he thought there were no prints of
      little feet on the garden-paths, and that before tea no one went off,
      laughing gaily, to bathe. What he had clung to more and more from his
      childhood upwards, what he had loved thinking about when he used to sit in
      the stuffy class-room or the lecture theatre—brightness, purity, and
      joy, everything that filled the house with life and light, had gone never
      to return, had vanished, and was mixed up with a coarse, clumsy story of
      some battalion officer, a chivalrous lieutenant, a depraved woman and a
      grandfather who had shot himself. . . . And to begin to talk about his
      mother or to think that the past could ever return would mean not
      understanding what was clear.
    

      Pyotr Mihalitch’s eyes filled with tears and his hand began to
      tremble as it lay on the table. Zina guessed what he was thinking about,
      and her eyes, too, glistened and looked red.
    

      “Grigory, come here,” she said to Vlassitch.
    

      They walked away to the window and began talking of something in a
      whisper. From the way that Vlassitch stooped down to her and the way she
      looked at him, Pyotr Mihalitch realised again that everything was
      irreparably over, and that it was no use to talk of anything. Zina went
      out of the room.
    

      “Well, brother!” Vlassitch began, after a brief silence,
      rubbing his hands and smiling. “I called our life happiness just
      now, but that was, so to speak, poetical license. In reality, there has
      not been a sense of happiness so far. Zina has been thinking all the time
      of you, of her mother, and has been worrying; looking at her, I, too, felt
      worried. Hers is a bold, free nature, but, you know, it’s difficult
      when you’re not used to it, and she is young, too. The servants call
      her ‘Miss’; it seems a trifle, but it upsets her. There it is,
      brother.”
    

      Zina brought in a plateful of strawberries. She was followed by a little
      maidservant, looking crushed and humble, who set a jug of milk on the
      table and made a very low bow: she had something about her that was in
      keeping with the old furniture, something petrified and dreary.
    

      The sound of the rain had ceased. Pyotr Mihalitch ate strawberries while
      Vlassitch and Zina looked at him in silence. The moment of the inevitable
      but useless conversation was approaching, and all three felt the burden of
      it. Pyotr Mihalitch’s eyes filled with tears again; he pushed away
      his plate and said that he must be going home, or it would be getting
      late, and perhaps it would rain again. The time had come when common
      decency required Zina to speak of those at home and of her new life.
    

      “How are things at home?” she asked rapidly, and her pale face
      quivered. “How is mother?”
    

      “You know mother . . .” said Pyotr Mihalitch, not looking at
      her.
    

      “Petrusha, you’ve thought a great deal about what has
      happened,” she said, taking hold of her brother’s sleeve, and
      he knew how hard it was for her to speak. “You’ve thought a
      great deal: tell me, can we reckon on mother’s accepting Grigory . .
      . and the whole position, one day?”
    

      She stood close to her brother, face to face with him, and he was
      astonished that she was so beautiful, and that he seemed not to have
      noticed it before. And it seemed to him utterly absurd that his sister, so
      like his mother, pampered, elegant, should be living with Vlassitch and in
      Vlassitch’s house, with the petrified servant, and the table with
      six legs—in the house where a man had been flogged to death, and
      that she was not going home with him, but was staying here to sleep.
    

      “You know mother,” he said, not answering her question.
      “I think you ought to have . . . to do something, to ask her
      forgiveness or something. . . .”
    

      “But to ask her forgiveness would mean pretending we had done wrong.
      I’m ready to tell a lie to comfort mother, but it won’t lead
      anywhere. I know mother. Well, what will be, must be!” said Zina,
      growing more cheerful now that the most unpleasant had been said. “We’ll
      wait for five years, ten years, and be patient, and then God’s will
      be done.”
    

      She took her brother’s arm, and when she walked through the dark
      hall she squeezed close to him. They went out on the steps. Pyotr
      Mihalitch said good-bye, got on his horse, and set off at a walk; Zina and
      Vlassitch walked a little way with him. It was still and warm, with a
      delicious smell of hay; stars were twinkling brightly between the clouds.
      Vlassitch’s old garden, which had seen so many gloomy stories in its
      time, lay slumbering in the darkness, and for some reason it was mournful
      riding through it.
    

      “Zina and I to-day after dinner spent some really exalted moments,”
      said Vlassitch. “I read aloud to her an excellent article on the
      question of emigration. You must read it, brother! You really must. It’s
      remarkable for its lofty tone. I could not resist writing a letter to the
      editor to be forwarded to the author. I wrote only a single line: ‘I
      thank you and warmly press your noble hand.’”
    

      Pyotr Mihalitch was tempted to say, “Don’t meddle in what does
      not concern you,” but he held his tongue.
    

      Vlassitch walked by his right stirrup and Zina by the left; both seemed to
      have forgotten that they had to go home. It was damp, and they had almost
      reached Koltovitch’s copse. Pyotr Mihalitch felt that they were
      expecting something from him, though they hardly knew what it was, and he
      felt unbearably sorry for them. Now as they walked by the horse with
      submissive faces, lost in thought, he had a deep conviction that they were
      unhappy, and could not be happy, and their love seemed to him a
      melancholy, irreparable mistake. Pity and the sense that he could do
      nothing to help them reduced him to that state of spiritual softening when
      he was ready to make any sacrifice to get rid of the painful feeling of
      sympathy.
    

      “I’ll come over sometimes for a night,” he said.
    

      But it sounded as though he were making a concession, and did not satisfy
      him. When they stopped near Koltovitch’s copse to say good-bye, he
      bent down to Zina, touched her shoulder, and said:
    

      “You are right, Zina! You have done well.” To avoid saying
      more and bursting into tears, he lashed his horse and galloped into the
      wood. As he rode into the darkness, he looked round and saw Vlassitch and
      Zina walking home along the road—he taking long strides, while she
      walked with a hurried, jerky step beside him—talking eagerly about
      something.
    

      “I am an old woman!” thought Pyotr Mihalitch. “I went to
      solve the question and I have only made it more complicated—there it
      is!”
    

      He was heavy at heart. When he got out of the copse he rode at a walk and
      then stopped his horse near the pond. He wanted to sit and think without
      moving. The moon was rising and was reflected in a streak of red on the
      other side of the pond. There were low rumbles of thunder in the distance.
      Pyotr Mihalitch looked steadily at the water and imagined his sister’s
      despair, her martyr-like pallor, the tearless eyes with which she would
      conceal her humiliation from others. He imagined her with child, imagined
      the death of their mother, her funeral, Zina’s horror. . . . The
      proud, superstitious old woman would be sure to die of grief. Terrible
      pictures of the future rose before him on the background of smooth, dark
      water, and among pale feminine figures he saw himself, a weak, cowardly
      man with a guilty face.
    

      A hundred paces off on the right bank of the pond, something dark was
      standing motionless: was it a man or a tall post? Pyotr Mihalitch thought
      of the divinity student who had been killed and thrown into the pond.
    

      “Olivier behaved inhumanly, but one way or another he did settle the
      question, while I have settled nothing and have only made it worse,”
      he thought, gazing at the dark figure that looked like a ghost. “He
      said and did what he thought right while I say and do what I don’t
      think right; and I don’t know really what I do think. . . .”
    

      He rode up to the dark figure: it was an old rotten post, the relic of
      some shed.
    

      From Koltovitch’s copse and garden there came a strong fragrant
      scent of lilies of the valley and honey-laden flowers. Pyotr Mihalitch
      rode along the bank of the pond and looked mournfully into the water. And
      thinking about his life, he came to the conclusion he had never said or
      acted upon what he really thought, and other people had repaid him in the
      same way. And so the whole of life seemed to him as dark as this water in
      which the night sky was reflected and water-weeds grew in a tangle. And it
      seemed to him that nothing could ever set it right.
    











      AT HOME
    

      I
    

THE Don railway. A
      quiet, cheerless station, white and solitary in the steppe, with its walls
      baking in the sun, without a speck of shade, and, it seems, without a
      human being. The train goes on after leaving one here; the sound of it is
      scarcely audible and dies away at last. Outside the station it is a
      desert, and there are no horses but one’s own. One gets into the
      carriage—which is so pleasant after the train—and is borne
      along the road through the steppe, and by degrees there are unfolded
      before one views such as one does not see near Moscow—immense,
      endless, fascinating in their monotony. The steppe, the steppe, and
      nothing more; in the distance an ancient barrow or a windmill; ox-waggons
      laden with coal trail by. . . . Solitary birds fly low over the plain, and
      a drowsy feeling comes with the monotonous beat of their wings. It is hot.
      Another hour or so passes, and still the steppe, the steppe, and still in
      the distance the barrow. The driver tells you something, some long
      unnecessary tale, pointing into the distance with his whip. And
      tranquillity takes possession of the soul; one is loth to think of the
      past. . . .
    

      A carriage with three horses had been sent to fetch Vera Ivanovna Kardin.
      The driver put in her luggage and set the harness to rights.
    

      “Everything just as it always has been,” said Vera, looking
      about her. “I was a little girl when I was here last, ten years ago.
      I remember old Boris came to fetch me then. Is he still living, I wonder?”
    

      The driver made no reply, but, like a Little Russian, looked at her
      angrily and clambered on to the box.
    

      It was a twenty-mile drive from the station, and Vera, too, abandoned
      herself to the charm of the steppe, forgot the past, and thought only of
      the wide expanse, of the freedom. Healthy, clever, beautiful, and young—she
      was only three-and-twenty—she had hitherto lacked nothing in her
      life but just this space and freedom.
    

      The steppe, the steppe. . . . The horses trotted, the sun rose higher and
      higher; and it seemed to Vera that never in her childhood had the steppe
      been so rich, so luxuriant in June; the wild flowers were green, yellow,
      lilac, white, and a fragrance rose from them and from the warmed earth;
      and there were strange blue birds along the roadside. . . . Vera had long
      got out of the habit of praying, but now, struggling with drowsiness, she
      murmured:
    

      “Lord, grant that I may be happy here.”
    

      And there was peace and sweetness in her soul, and she felt as though she
      would have been glad to drive like that all her life, looking at the
      steppe.
    

      Suddenly there was a deep ravine overgrown with oak saplings and
      alder-trees; there was a moist feeling in the air—there must have
      been a spring at the bottom. On the near side, on the very edge of the
      ravine, a covey of partridges rose noisily. Vera remembered that in old
      days they used to go for evening walks to this ravine; so it must be near
      home! And now she could actually see the poplars, the barn, black smoke
      rising on one side—they were burning old straw. And there was Auntie
      Dasha coming to meet her and waving her handkerchief; grandfather was on
      the terrace. Oh dear, how happy she was!
    

      “My darling, my darling!” cried her aunt, shrieking as though
      she were in hysterics. “Our real mistress has come! You must
      understand you are our mistress, you are our queen! Here everything is
      yours! My darling, my beauty, I am not your aunt, but your willing slave!”
    

      Vera had no relations but her aunt and her grandfather; her mother had
      long been dead; her father, an engineer, had died three months before at
      Kazan, on his way from Siberia. Her grandfather had a big grey beard. He
      was stout, red-faced, and asthmatic, and walked leaning on a cane and
      sticking his stomach out. Her aunt, a lady of forty-two, drawn in tightly
      at the waist and fashionably dressed with sleeves high on the shoulder,
      evidently tried to look young and was still anxious to be charming; she
      walked with tiny steps with a wriggle of her spine.
    

      “Will you love us?” she said, embracing Vera, “You are
      not proud?”
    

      At her grandfather’s wish there was a thanksgiving service, then
      they spent a long while over dinner—and Vera’s new life began.
      She was given the best room. All the rugs in the house had been put in it,
      and a great many flowers; and when at night she lay down in her snug,
      wide, very soft bed and covered herself with a silk quilt that smelt of
      old clothes long stored away, she laughed with pleasure. Auntie Dasha came
      in for a minute to wish her good-night.
    

      “Here you are home again, thank God,” she said, sitting down
      on the bed. “As you see, we get along very well and have everything
      we want. There’s only one thing: your grandfather is in a poor way!
      A terribly poor way! He is short of breath and he has begun to lose his
      memory. And you remember how strong, how vigorous, he used to be! There
      was no doing anything with him. . . . In old days, if the servants didn’t
      please him or anything else went wrong, he would jump up at once and
      shout: ‘Twenty-five strokes! The birch!’ But now he has grown
      milder and you never hear him. And besides, times are changed, my
      precious; one mayn’t beat them nowadays. Of course, they oughtn’t
      to be beaten, but they need looking after.”
    

      “And are they beaten now, auntie?” asked Vera.
    

      “The steward beats them sometimes, but I never do, bless their
      hearts! And your grandfather sometimes lifts his stick from old habit, but
      he never beats them.”
    

      Auntie Dasha yawned and crossed herself over her mouth and her right ear.
    

      “It’s not dull here?” Vera inquired.
    

      “What shall I say? There are no landowners living here now, but
      there have been works built near, darling, and there are lots of
      engineers, doctors, and mine managers. Of course, we have theatricals and
      concerts, but we play cards more than anything. They come to us, too. Dr.
      Neshtchapov from the works comes to see us—such a handsome,
      interesting man! He fell in love with your photograph. I made up my mind:
      he is Verotchka’s destiny, I thought. He’s young, handsome, he
      has means—a good match, in fact. And of course you’re a match
      for any one. You’re of good family. The place is mortgaged, it’s
      true, but it’s in good order and not neglected; there is my share in
      it, but it will all come to you; I am your willing slave. And my brother,
      your father, left you fifteen thousand roubles. . . . But I see you can’t
      keep your eyes open. Sleep, my child.”
    

      Next day Vera spent a long time walking round the house. The garden, which
      was old and unattractive, lying inconveniently upon the slope, had no
      paths, and was utterly neglected; probably the care of it was regarded as
      an unnecessary item in the management. There were numbers of grass-snakes.
      Hoopoes flew about under the trees calling “Oo-too-toot!” as
      though they were trying to remind her of something. At the bottom of the
      hill there was a river overgrown with tall reeds, and half a mile beyond
      the river was the village. From the garden Vera went out into the fields;
      looking into the distance, thinking of her new life in her own home, she
      kept trying to grasp what was in store for her. The space, the lovely
      peace of the steppe, told her that happiness was near at hand, and perhaps
      was here already; thousands of people, in fact, would have said: “What
      happiness to be young, healthy, well-educated, to be living on one’s
      own estate!” And at the same time the endless plain, all alike,
      without one living soul, frightened her, and at moments it was clear to
      her that its peaceful green vastness would swallow up her life and reduce
      it to nothingness. She was very young, elegant, fond of life; she had
      finished her studies at an aristocratic boarding-school, had learnt three
      languages, had read a great deal, had travelled with her father—and
      could all this have been meant to lead to nothing but settling down in a
      remote country-house in the steppe, and wandering day after day from the
      garden into the fields and from the fields into the garden to while away
      the time, and then sitting at home listening to her grandfather’s
      breathing? But what could she do? Where could she go? She could find no
      answer, and as she was returning home she doubted whether she would be
      happy here, and thought that driving from the station was far more
      interesting than living here.
    

      Dr. Neshtchapov drove over from the works. He was a doctor, but three
      years previously he had taken a share in the works, and had become one of
      the partners; and now he no longer looked upon medicine as his chief
      vocation, though he still practised. In appearance he was a pale, dark man
      in a white waistcoat, with a good figure; but to guess what there was in
      his heart and his brain was difficult. He kissed Auntie Dasha’s hand
      on greeting her, and was continually leaping up to set a chair or give his
      seat to some one. He was very silent and grave all the while, and, when he
      did speak, it was for some reason impossible to hear and understand his
      first sentence, though he spoke correctly and not in a low voice.
    

      “You play the piano?” he asked Vera, and immediately leapt up,
      as she had dropped her handkerchief.
    

      He stayed from midday to midnight without speaking, and Vera found him
      very unattractive. She thought that a white waistcoat in the country was
      bad form, and his elaborate politeness, his manners, and his pale, serious
      face with dark eyebrows, were mawkish; and it seemed to her that he was
      perpetually silent, probably because he was stupid. When he had gone her
      aunt said enthusiastically:
    

      “Well? Isn’t he charming?”
    

      II
    

      Auntie Dasha looked after the estate. Tightly laced, with jingling
      bracelets on her wrists, she went into the kitchen, the granary, the
      cattle-yard, tripping along with tiny steps, wriggling her spine; and
      whenever she talked to the steward or to the peasants, she used, for some
      reason, to put on a pince-nez. Vera’s grandfather always sat in the
      same place, playing patience or dozing. He ate a very great deal at dinner
      and supper; they gave him the dinner cooked to-day and what was left from
      yesterday, and cold pie left from Sunday, and salt meat from the servants’
      dinner, and he ate it all greedily. And every dinner left on Vera such an
      impression, that when she saw afterwards a flock of sheep driven by, or
      flour being brought from the mill, she thought, “Grandfather will
      eat that.” For the most part he was silent, absorbed in eating or in
      patience; but it sometimes happened at dinner that at the sight of Vera he
      would be touched and say tenderly:
    

      “My only grandchild! Verotchka!”
    

      And tears would glisten in his eyes. Or his face would turn suddenly
      crimson, his neck would swell, he would look with fury at the servants,
      and ask, tapping with his stick:
    

      “Why haven’t you brought the horse-radish?”
    

      In winter he led a perfectly inactive existence; in summer he sometimes
      drove out into the fields to look at the oats and the hay; and when he
      came back he would flourish his stick and declare that everything was
      neglected now that he was not there to look after it.
    

      “Your grandfather is out of humour,” Auntie Dasha would
      whisper. “But it’s nothing now to what it used to be in the
      old days: ‘Twenty-five strokes! The birch!’”
    

      Her aunt complained that every one had grown lazy, that no one did
      anything, and that the estate yielded no profit. Indeed, there was no
      systematic farming; they ploughed and sowed a little simply from habit,
      and in reality did nothing and lived in idleness. Meanwhile there was a
      running to and fro, reckoning and worrying all day long; the bustle in the
      house began at five o’clock in the morning; there were continual
      sounds of “Bring it,” “Fetch it,” “Make
      haste,” and by the evening the servants were utterly exhausted.
      Auntie Dasha changed her cooks and her housemaids every week; sometimes
      she discharged them for immorality; sometimes they went of their own
      accord, complaining that they were worked to death. None of the village
      people would come to the house as servants; Auntie Dasha had to hire them
      from a distance. There was only one girl from the village living in the
      house, Alyona, and she stayed because her whole family—old people
      and children—were living upon her wages. This Alyona, a pale, rather
      stupid little thing, spent the whole day turning out the rooms, waiting at
      table, heating the stoves, sewing, washing; but it always seemed as though
      she were only pottering about, treading heavily with her boots, and were
      nothing but a hindrance in the house. In her terror that she might be
      dismissed and sent home, she often dropped and broke the crockery, and
      they stopped the value of it out of her wages, and then her mother and
      grandmother would come and bow down at Auntie Dasha’s feet.
    

      Once a week or sometimes oftener visitors would arrive. Her aunt would
      come to Vera and say:
    

      “You should sit a little with the visitors, or else they’ll
      think that you are stuck up.”
    

      Vera would go in to the visitors and play vint with them for hours
      together, or play the piano for the visitors to dance; her aunt, in high
      spirits and breathless from dancing, would come up and whisper to her:
    

      “Be nice to Marya Nikiforovna.”
    

      On the sixth of December, St. Nikolay’s Day, a large party of about
      thirty arrived all at once; they played vint until late at night,
      and many of them stayed the night. In the morning they sat down to cards
      again, then they had dinner, and when Vera went to her room after dinner
      to rest from conversation and tobacco smoke, there were visitors there
      too, and she almost wept in despair. And when they began to get ready to
      go in the evening, she was so pleased they were going at last, that she
      said:
    

      “Do stay a little longer.”
    

      She felt exhausted by the visitors and constrained by their presence; yet
      every day, as soon as it began to grow dark, something drew her out of the
      house, and she went out to pay visits either at the works or at some
      neighbours’, and then there were cards, dancing, forfeits, suppers.
      . . .The young people in the works or in the mines sometimes sang Little
      Russian songs, and sang them very well. It made one sad to hear them sing.
      Or they all gathered together in one room and talked in the dusk of the
      mines, of the treasures that had once been buried in the steppes, of Saur’s
      Grave. . . . Later on, as they talked, a shout of “Help!”
      sometimes reached them. It was a drunken man going home, or some one was
      being robbed by the pit near by. Or the wind howled in the chimneys, the
      shutters banged; then, soon afterwards, they would hear the uneasy church
      bell, as the snow-storm began.
    

      At all the evening parties, picnics, and dinners, Auntie Dasha was
      invariably the most interesting woman and the doctor the most interesting
      man. There was very little reading either at the works or at the
      country-houses; they played only marches and polkas; and the young people
      always argued hotly about things they did not understand, and the effect
      was crude. The discussions were loud and heated, but, strange to say, Vera
      had nowhere else met people so indifferent and careless as these. They
      seemed to have no fatherland, no religion, no public interests. When they
      talked of literature or debated some abstract question, it could be seen
      from Dr. Neshtchapov’s face that the question had no interest for
      him whatever, and that for long, long years he had read nothing and cared
      to read nothing. Serious and expressionless, like a badly painted
      portrait, for ever in his white waistcoat, he was silent and
      incomprehensible as before; but the ladies, young and old, thought him
      interesting and were enthusiastic over his manners. They envied Vera, who
      appeared to attract him very much. And Vera always came away from the
      visits with a feeling of vexation, vowing inwardly to remain at home; but
      the day passed, the evening came, and she hurried off to the works again,
      and it was like that almost all the winter.
    

      She ordered books and magazines, and used to read them in her room. And
      she read at night, lying in bed. When the clock in the corridor struck two
      or three, and her temples were beginning to ache from reading, she sat up
      in bed and thought, “What am I to do? Where am I to go?”
      Accursed, importunate question, to which there were a number of ready-made
      answers, and in reality no answer at all.
    

      Oh, how noble, how holy, how picturesque it must be to serve the people,
      to alleviate their sufferings, to enlighten them! But she, Vera, did not
      know the people. And how could she go to them? They were strange and
      uninteresting to her; she could not endure the stuffy smell of the huts,
      the pot-house oaths, the unwashed children, the women’s talk of
      illnesses. To walk over the snow-drifts, to feel cold, then to sit in a
      stifling hut, to teach children she disliked—no, she would rather
      die! And to teach the peasants’ children while Auntie Dasha made
      money out of the pot-houses and fined the peasants—it was too great
      a farce! What a lot of talk there was of schools, of village libraries, of
      universal education; but if all these engineers, these mine-owners and
      ladies of her acquaintance, had not been hypocrites, and really had
      believed that enlightenment was necessary, they would not have paid the
      schoolmasters fifteen roubles a month as they did now, and would not have
      let them go hungry. And the schools and the talk about ignorance—it
      was all only to stifle the voice of conscience because they were ashamed
      to own fifteen or thirty thousand acres and to be indifferent to the
      peasants’ lot. Here the ladies said about Dr. Neshtchapov that he
      was a kind man and had built a school at the works. Yes, he had built a
      school out of the old bricks at the works for some eight hundred roubles,
      and they sang the prayer for “long life” to him when the
      building was opened, but there was no chance of his giving up his shares,
      and it certainly never entered his head that the peasants were human
      beings like himself, and that they, too, needed university teaching, and
      not merely lessons in these wretched schools.
    

      And Vera felt full of anger against herself and every one else. She took
      up a book again and tried to read it, but soon afterwards sat down and
      thought again. To become a doctor? But to do that one must pass an
      examination in Latin; besides, she had an invincible repugnance to corpses
      and disease. It would be nice to become a mechanic, a judge, a commander
      of a steamer, a scientist; to do something into which she could put all
      her powers, physical and spiritual, and to be tired out and sleep soundly
      at night; to give up her life to something that would make her an
      interesting person, able to attract interesting people, to love, to have a
      real family of her own. . . . But what was she to do? How was she to
      begin?
    

      One Sunday in Lent her aunt came into her room early in the morning to
      fetch her umbrella. Vera was sitting up in bed clasping her head in her
      hands, thinking.
    

      “You ought to go to church, darling,” said her aunt, “or
      people will think you are not a believer.”
    

      Vera made no answer.
    

      “I see you are dull, poor child,” said Auntie Dasha, sinking
      on her knees by the bedside; she adored Vera. “Tell me the truth,
      are you bored?”
    

      “Dreadfully.”
    

      “My beauty, my queen, I am your willing slave, I wish you nothing
      but good and happiness. . . . Tell me, why don’t you want to marry
      Nestchapov? What more do you want, my child? You must forgive me, darling;
      you can’t pick and choose like this, we are not princes . . . . Time
      is passing, you are not seventeen. . . . And I don’t understand it!
      He loves you, idolises you!”
    

      “Oh, mercy!” said Vera with vexation. “How can I tell?
      He sits dumb and never says a word.”
    

      “He’s shy, darling. . . . He’s afraid you’ll
      refuse him!”
    

      And when her aunt had gone away, Vera remained standing in the middle of
      her room uncertain whether to dress or to go back to bed. The bed was
      hateful; if one looked out of the window there were the bare trees, the
      grey snow, the hateful jackdaws, the pigs that her grandfather would eat.
      . . .
    

      “Yes, after all, perhaps I’d better get married!” she
      thought.
    

      III
    

      For two days Auntie Dasha went about with a tear-stained and heavily
      powdered face, and at dinner she kept sighing and looking towards the
      ikon. And it was impossible to make out what was the matter with her. But
      at last she made up her mind, went in to Vera, and said in a casual way:
    

      “The fact is, child, we have to pay interest on the bank loan, and
      the tenant hasn’t paid his rent. Will you let me pay it out of the
      fifteen thousand your papa left you?”
    

      All day afterwards Auntie Dasha spent in making cherry jam in the garden.
      Alyona, with her cheeks flushed with the heat, ran to and from the garden
      to the house and back again to the cellar.
    

      When Auntie Dasha was making jam with a very serious face as though she
      were performing a religious rite, and her short sleeves displayed her
      strong, little, despotic hands and arms, and when the servants ran about
      incessantly, bustling about the jam which they would never taste, there
      was always a feeling of martyrdom in the air. . . .
    

      The garden smelt of hot cherries. The sun had set, the charcoal stove had
      been carried away, but the pleasant, sweetish smell still lingered in the
      air. Vera sat on a bench in the garden and watched a new labourer, a young
      soldier, not of the neighbourhood, who was, by her express orders, making
      new paths. He was cutting the turf with a spade and heaping it up on a
      barrow.
    

      “Where were you serving?” Vera asked him.
    

      “At Berdyansk.”
    

      “And where are you going now? Home?”
    

      “No,” answered the labourer. “I have no home.”
    

      “But where were you born and brought up?”
    

      “In the province of Oryol. Till I went into the army I lived with my
      mother, in my step-father’s house; my mother was the head of the
      house, and people looked up to her, and while she lived I was cared for.
      But while I was in the army I got a letter telling me my mother was dead.
      . . . And now I don’t seem to care to go home. It’s not my own
      father, so it’s not like my own home.”
    

      “Then your father is dead?”
    

      “I don’t know. I am illegitimate.”
    

      At that moment Auntie Dasha appeared at the window and said:
    

      “Il ne faut pas parler aux gens . . . . Go into the kitchen,
      my good man. You can tell your story there,” she said to the
      soldier.
    

      And then came as yesterday and every day supper, reading, a sleepless
      night, and endless thinking about the same thing. At three o’clock
      the sun rose; Alyona was already busy in the corridor, and Vera was not
      asleep yet and was trying to read. She heard the creak of the barrow: it
      was the new labourer at work in the garden. . . . Vera sat at the open
      window with a book, dozed, and watched the soldier making the paths for
      her, and that interested her. The paths were as even and level as a
      leather strap, and it was pleasant to imagine what they would be like when
      they were strewn with yellow sand.
    

      She could see her aunt come out of the house soon after five o’clock,
      in a pink wrapper and curl-papers. She stood on the steps for three
      minutes without speaking, and then said to the soldier:
    

      “Take your passport and go in peace. I can’t have any one
      illegitimate in my house.”
    

      An oppressive, angry feeling sank like a stone on Vera’s heart. She
      was indignant with her aunt, she hated her; she was so sick of her aunt
      that her heart was full of misery and loathing. But what was she to do? To
      stop her mouth? To be rude to her? But what would be the use? Suppose she
      struggled with her, got rid of her, made her harmless, prevented her
      grandfather from flourishing his stick— what would be the use of it?
      It would be like killing one mouse or one snake in the boundless steppe.
      The vast expanse, the long winters, the monotony and dreariness of life,
      instil a sense of helplessness; the position seems hopeless, and one wants
      to do nothing—everything is useless.
    

      Alyona came in, and bowing low to Vera, began carrying out the arm-chairs
      to beat the dust out of them.
    

      “You have chosen a time to clean up,” said Vera with
      annoyance. “Go away.”
    

      Alyona was overwhelmed, and in her terror could not understand what was
      wanted of her. She began hurriedly tidying up the dressing-table.
    

      “Go out of the room, I tell you,” Vera shouted, turning cold;
      she had never had such an oppressive feeling before. “Go away!”
    

      Alyona uttered a sort of moan, like a bird, and dropped Vera’s gold
      watch on the carpet.
    

      “Go away!” Vera shrieked in a voice not her own, leaping up
      and trembling all over. “Send her away; she worries me to death!”
      she went on, walking rapidly after Alyona down the passage, stamping her
      feet. “Go away! Birch her! Beat her!” Then suddenly she came
      to herself, and just as she was, unwashed, uncombed, in her dressing-gown
      and slippers, she rushed out of the house. She ran to the familiar ravine
      and hid herself there among the sloe-trees, so that she might see no one
      and be seen by no one. Lying there motionless on the grass, she did not
      weep, she was not horror-stricken, but gazing at the sky open-eyed, she
      reflected coldly and clearly that something had happened which she could
      never forget and for which she could never forgive herself all her life.
    

      “No, I can’t go on like this,” she thought. “It’s
      time to take myself in hand, or there’ll be no end to it. . . . I
      can’t go on like this. . . .”
    

      At midday Dr. Neshtchapov drove by the ravine on his way to the house. She
      saw him and made up her mind that she would begin a new life, and that she
      would make herself begin it, and this decision calmed her. And following
      with her eyes the doctor’s well-built figure, she said, as though
      trying to soften the crudity of her decision:
    

      “He’s a nice man. . . . We shall get through life somehow.”
    

      She returned home. While she was dressing, Auntie Dasha came into the
      room, and said:
    

      “Alyona upset you, darling; I’ve sent her home to the village.
      Her mother’s given her a good beating and has come here, crying.”
    

      “Auntie,” said Vera quickly, “I’m going to marry
      Dr. Neshtchapov. Only talk to him yourself . . . I can’t.”
    

      And again she went out into the fields. And wandering aimlessly about, she
      made up her mind that when she was married she would look after the house,
      doctor the peasants, teach in the school, that she would do all the things
      that other women of her circle did. And this perpetual dissatisfaction
      with herself and every one else, this series of crude mistakes which stand
      up like a mountain before one whenever one looks back upon one’s
      past, she would accept as her real life to which she was fated, and she
      would expect nothing better. . . . Of course there was nothing better!
      Beautiful nature, dreams, music, told one story, but reality another.
      Evidently truth and happiness existed somewhere outside real life. . . .
      One must give up one’s own life and merge oneself into this
      luxuriant steppe, boundless and indifferent as eternity, with its flowers,
      its ancient barrows, and its distant horizon, and then it would be well
      with one. . . .
    

      A month later Vera was living at the works.
    











      EXPENSIVE LESSONS
    

FOR a cultivated
      man to be ignorant of foreign languages is a great inconvenience. Vorotov
      became acutely conscious of it when, after taking his degree, he began
      upon a piece of research work.
    

      “It’s awful,” he said, breathing hard (although he was
      only twenty-six he was fat, heavy, and suffered from shortness of breath).
    

      “It’s awful! Without languages I’m like a bird without
      wings. I might just as well give up the work.”
    

      And he made up his mind at all costs to overcome his innate laziness, and
      to learn French and German; and began to look out for a teacher.
    

      One winter noon, as Vorotov was sitting in his study at work, the servant
      told him that a young lady was inquiring for him.
    

      “Ask her in,” said Vorotov.
    

      And a young lady elaborately dressed in the last fashion walked in. She
      introduced herself as a teacher of French, Alice Osipovna EnquÃªte, and
      told Vorotov that she had been sent to him by one of his friends.
    

      “Delighted! Please sit down,” said Vorotov, breathing hard and
      putting his hand over the collar of his nightshirt (to breathe more freely
      he always wore a nightshirt at work instead of a stiff linen one with
      collar). “It was Pyotr Sergeitch sent you? Yes, yes . . . I asked
      him about it. Delighted!”
    

      As he talked to Mdlle. EnquÃªte he looked at her shyly and with curiosity.
      She was a genuine Frenchwoman, very elegant and still quite young. Judging
      from her pale, languid face, her short curly hair, and her unnaturally
      slim waist, she might have been eighteen; but looking at her broad,
      well-developed shoulders, the elegant lines of her back and her severe
      eyes, Vorotov thought that she was not less than three-and-twenty and
      might be twenty-five; but then again he began to think she was not more
      than eighteen. Her face looked as cold and business-like as the face of a
      person who has come to speak about money. She did not once smile or frown,
      and only once a look of perplexity flitted over her face when she learnt
      that she was not required to teach children, but a stout grown-up man.
    

      “So, Alice Osipovna,” said Vorotov, “we’ll have a
      lesson every evening from seven to eight. As regards your terms—a
      rouble a lesson—I’ve nothing to say against that. By all means
      let it be a rouble. . . .”
    

      And he asked her if she would not have some tea or coffee, whether it was
      a fine day, and with a good-natured smile, stroking the baize of the
      table, he inquired in a friendly voice who she was, where she had studied,
      and what she lived on.
    

      With a cold, business-like expression, Alice Osipovna answered that she
      had completed her studies at a private school and had the diploma of a
      private teacher, that her father had died lately of scarlet fever, that
      her mother was alive and made artificial flowers; that she, Mdlle.
      EnquÃªte, taught in a private school till dinnertime, and after dinner was
      busy till evening giving lessons in different good families.
    

      She went away leaving behind her the faint fragrance of a woman’s
      clothes. For a long time afterwards Vorotov could not settle to work, but,
      sitting at the table stroking its green baize surface, he meditated.
    

      “It’s very pleasant to see a girl working to earn her own
      living,” he thought. “On the other hand, it’s very
      unpleasant to think that poverty should not spare such elegant and pretty
      girls as Alice Osipovna, and that she, too, should have to struggle for
      existence. It’s a sad thing!”
    

      Having never seen virtuous Frenchwomen before, he reflected also that this
      elegantly dressed young lady with her well-developed shoulders and
      exaggeratedly small waist in all probability followed another calling as
      well as giving French lessons.
    

      The next evening when the clock pointed to five minutes to seven, Mdlle.
      EnquÃªte appeared, rosy from the frost. She opened Margot, which she had
      brought with her, and without introduction began:
    

      “French grammar has twenty-six letters. The first letter is called
      A, the second B . . .”
    

      “Excuse me,” Vorotov interrupted, smiling. “I must warn
      you, mademoiselle, that you must change your method a little in my case.
      You see, I know Russian, Greek, and Latin well. . . . I’ve studied
      comparative philology, and I think we might omit Margot and pass straight
      to reading some author.”
    

      And he explained to the French girl how grown-up people learn languages.
    

      “A friend of mine,” he said, “wanting to learn modern
      languages, laid before him the French, German, and Latin gospels, and read
      them side by side, carefully analysing each word, and would you believe
      it, he attained his object in less than a year. Let us do the same. We’ll
      take some author and read him.”
    

      The French girl looked at him in perplexity. Evidently the suggestion
      seemed to her very naÃ¯ve and ridiculous. If this strange proposal had been
      made to her by a child, she would certainly have been angry and have
      scolded it, but as he was a grown-up man and very stout and she could not
      scold him, she only shrugged her shoulders hardly perceptibly and said:
    

      “As you please.”
    

      Vorotov rummaged in his bookcase and picked out a dog’s-eared French
      book.
    

      “Will this do?”
    

      “It’s all the same,” she said.
    

      “In that case let us begin, and good luck to it! Let’s begin
      with the title . . . ‘MÃ©moires.’”
    

      “Reminiscences,” Mdlle. EnquÃªte translated.
    

      With a good-natured smile, breathing hard, he spent a quarter of an hour
      over the word “MÃ©moires,” and as much over the word de,
      and this wearied the young lady. She answered his questions languidly,
      grew confused, and evidently did not understand her pupil well, and did
      not attempt to understand him. Vorotov asked her questions, and at the
      same time kept looking at her fair hair and thinking:
    

      “Her hair isn’t naturally curly; she curls it. It’s a
      strange thing! She works from morning to night, and yet she has time to
      curl her hair.”
    

      At eight o’clock precisely she got up, and saying coldly and dryly,
      “Au revoir, monsieur,” walked out of the study, leaving behind
      her the same tender, delicate, disturbing fragrance. For a long time again
      her pupil did nothing; he sat at the table meditating.
    

      During the days that followed he became convinced that his teacher was a
      charming, conscientious, and precise young lady, but that she was very
      badly educated, and incapable of teaching grown-up people, and he made up
      his mind not to waste his time, to get rid of her, and to engage another
      teacher. When she came the seventh time he took out of his pocket an
      envelope with seven roubles in it, and holding it in his hand, became very
      confused and began:
    

      “Excuse me, Alice Osipovna, but I ought to tell you . . . I’m
      under painful necessity . . .”
    

      Seeing the envelope, the French girl guessed what was meant, and for the
      first time during their lessons her face quivered and her cold,
      business-like expression vanished. She coloured a little, and dropping her
      eyes, began nervously fingering her slender gold chain. And Vorotov,
      seeing her perturbation, realised how much a rouble meant to her, and how
      bitter it would be to her to lose what she was earning.
    

      “I ought to tell you,” he muttered, growing more and more
      confused, and quavering inwardly; he hurriedly stuffed the envelope into
      his pocket and went on: “Excuse me, I . . . I must leave you for ten
      minutes.”
    

      And trying to appear as though he had not in the least meant to get rid of
      her, but only to ask her permission to leave her for a short time, he went
      into the next room and sat there for ten minutes. And then he returned
      more embarrassed than ever: it struck him that she might have interpreted
      his brief absence in some way of her own, and he felt awkward.
    

      The lessons began again. Yorotov felt no interest in them. Realising that
      he would gain nothing from the lessons, he gave the French girl liberty to
      do as she liked, asking her nothing and not interrupting her. She
      translated away as she pleased ten pages during a lesson, and he did not
      listen, breathed hard, and having nothing better to do, gazed at her curly
      head, or her soft white hands or her neck and sniffed the fragrance of her
      clothes. He caught himself thinking very unsuitable thoughts, and felt
      ashamed, or he was moved to tenderness, and then he felt vexed and wounded
      that she was so cold and business-like with him, and treated him as a
      pupil, never smiling and seeming afraid that he might accidentally touch
      her. He kept wondering how to inspire her with confidence and get to know
      her better, and to help her, to make her understand how badly she taught,
      poor thing.
    

      One day Mdlle. EnquÃªte came to the lesson in a smart pink dress, slightly
      dÃ©colletÃ©, and surrounded by such a fragrance that she seemed to be
      wrapped in a cloud, and, if one blew upon her, ready to fly away into the
      air or melt away like smoke. She apologised and said she could stay only
      half an hour for the lesson, as she was going straight from the lesson to
      a dance.
    

      He looked at her throat and the back of her bare neck, and thought he
      understood why Frenchwomen had the reputation of frivolous creatures
      easily seduced; he was carried away by this cloud of fragrance, beauty,
      and bare flesh, while she, unconscious of his thoughts and probably not in
      the least interested in them, rapidly turned over the pages and translated
      at full steam:
    

      “‘He was walking the street and meeting a gentleman his friend
      and saying, “Where are you striving to seeing your face so pale it
      makes me sad.”’”
    

      The “MÃ©moires” had long been finished, and now Alice was
      translating some other book. One day she came an hour too early for the
      lesson, apologizing and saying that she wanted to leave at seven and go to
      the Little Theatre. Seeing her out after the lesson, Vorotov dressed and
      went to the theatre himself. He went, and fancied that he was going simply
      for change and amusement, and that he was not thinking about Alice at all.
      He could not admit that a serious man, preparing for a learned career,
      lethargic in his habits, could fling up his work and go to the theatre
      simply to meet there a girl he knew very little, who was unintelligent and
      utterly unintellectual.
    

      Yet for some reason his heart was beating during the intervals, and
      without realizing what he was doing, he raced about the corridors and
      foyer like a boy impatiently looking for some one, and he was disappointed
      when the interval was over. And when he saw the familiar pink dress and
      the handsome shoulders under the tulle, his heart quivered as though with
      a foretaste of happiness; he smiled joyfully, and for the first time in
      his life experienced the sensation of jealousy.
    

      Alice was walking with two unattractive-looking students and an officer.
      She was laughing, talking loudly, and obviously flirting. Vorotov had
      never seen her like that. She was evidently happy, contented, warm,
      sincere. What for? Why? Perhaps because these men were her friends and
      belonged to her own circle. And Vorotov felt there was a terrible gulf
      between himself and that circle. He bowed to his teacher, but she gave him
      a chilly nod and walked quickly by; she evidently did not care for her
      friends to know that she had pupils, and that she had to give lessons to
      earn money.
    

      After the meeting at the theatre Vorotov realised that he was in love. . .
      . During the subsequent lessons he feasted his eyes on his elegant
      teacher, and without struggling with himself, gave full rein to his
      imaginations, pure and impure. Mdlle. EnquÃªte’s face did not cease
      to be cold; precisely at eight o’clock every evening she said
      coldly, “Au revoir, monsieur,” and he felt she cared nothing
      about him, and never would care anything about him, and that his position
      was hopeless.
    

      Sometimes in the middle of a lesson he would begin dreaming, hoping,
      making plans. He inwardly composed declarations of love, remembered that
      Frenchwomen were frivolous and easily won, but it was enough for him to
      glance at the face of his teacher for his ideas to be extinguished as a
      candle is blown out when you bring it into the wind on the verandah. Once,
      overcome, forgetting himself as though in delirium, he could not restrain
      himself, and barred her way as she was going from the study into the entry
      after the lesson, and, gasping for breath and stammering, began to declare
      his love:
    

      “You are dear to me! I . . . I love you! Allow me to speak.”
    

      And Alice turned pale—probably from dismay, reflecting that after
      this declaration she could not come here again and get a rouble a lesson.
      With a frightened look in her eyes she said in a loud whisper:
    

      “Ach, you mustn’t! Don’t speak, I entreat you! You mustn’t!”
    

      And Vorotov did not sleep all night afterwards; he was tortured by shame;
      he blamed himself and thought intensely. It seemed to him that he had
      insulted the girl by his declaration, that she would not come to him
      again.
    

      He resolved to find out her address from the address bureau in the
      morning, and to write her a letter of apology. But Alice came without a
      letter. For the first minute she felt uncomfortable, then she opened a
      book and began briskly and rapidly translating as usual:
    

      “‘Oh, young gentleman, don’t tear those flowers in my
      garden which I want to be giving to my ill daughter. . . .’”
    

      She still comes to this day. Four books have already been translated, but
      Vorotov knows no French but the word “MÃ©moires,” and when he
      is asked about his literary researches, he waves his hand, and without
      answering, turns the conversation to the weather.
    











      THE PRINCESS
    

A CARRIAGE with
      four fine sleek horses drove in at the big so-called Red Gate of the N—-
      Monastery. While it was still at a distance, the priests and monks who
      were standing in a group round the part of the hostel allotted to the
      gentry, recognised by the coachman and horses that the lady in the
      carriage was Princess Vera Gavrilovna, whom they knew very well.
    

      An old man in livery jumped off the box and helped the princess to get out
      of the carriage. She raised her dark veil and moved in a leisurely way up
      to the priests to receive their blessing; then she nodded pleasantly to
      the rest of the monks and went into the hostel.
    

      “Well, have you missed your princess?” she said to the monk
      who brought in her things. “It’s a whole month since I’ve
      been to see you. But here I am; behold your princess. And where is the
      Father Superior? My goodness, I am burning with impatience! Wonderful,
      wonderful old man! You must be proud of having such a Superior.”
    

      When the Father Superior came in, the princess uttered a shriek of
      delight, crossed her arms over her bosom, and went up to receive his
      blessing.
    

      “No, no, let me kiss your hand,” she said, snatching it and
      eagerly kissing it three times. “How glad I am to see you at last,
      holy Father! I’m sure you’ve forgotten your princess, but my
      thoughts have been in your dear monastery every moment. How delightful it
      is here! This living for God far from the busy, giddy world has a special
      charm of its own, holy Father, which I feel with my whole soul although I
      cannot express it!”
    

      The princess’s cheeks glowed and tears came into her eyes. She
      talked incessantly, fervently, while the Father Superior, a grave, plain,
      shy old man of seventy, remained mute or uttered abruptly, like a soldier
      on duty, phrases such as:
    

      “Certainly, Your Excellency. . . . Quite so. I understand.”
    

      “Has Your Excellency come for a long stay?” he inquired.
    

      “I shall stay the night here, and to-morrow I’m going on to
      Klavdia Nikolaevna’s—it’s a long time since I’ve
      seen her—and the day after to-morrow I’ll come back to you and
      stay three or four days. I want to rest my soul here among you, holy
      Father. . . .”
    

      The princess liked being at the monastery at N—-. For the last two
      years it had been a favourite resort of hers; she used to go there almost
      every month in the summer and stay two or three days, even sometimes a
      week. The shy novices, the stillness, the low ceilings, the smell of
      cypress, the modest fare, the cheap curtains on the windows—all this
      touched her, softened her, and disposed her to contemplation and good
      thoughts. It was enough for her to be half an hour in the hostel for her
      to feel that she, too, was timid and modest, and that she, too, smelt of
      cypress-wood. The past retreated into the background, lost its
      significance, and the princess began to imagine that in spite of her
      twenty-nine years she was very much like the old Father Superior, and
      that, like him, she was created not for wealth, not for earthly grandeur
      and love, but for a peaceful life secluded from the world, a life in
      twilight like the hostel.
    

      It happens that a ray of light gleams in the dark cell of the anchorite
      absorbed in prayer, or a bird alights on the window and sings its song;
      the stern anchorite will smile in spite of himself, and a gentle, sinless
      joy will pierce through the load of grief over his sins, like water
      flowing from under a stone. The princess fancied she brought from the
      outside world just such comfort as the ray of light or the bird. Her gay,
      friendly smile, her gentle eyes, her voice, her jests, her whole
      personality in fact, her little graceful figure always dressed in simple
      black, must arouse in simple, austere people a feeling of tenderness and
      joy. Every one, looking at her, must think: “God has sent us an
      angel. . . .” And feeling that no one could help thinking this, she
      smiled still more cordially, and tried to look like a bird.
    

      After drinking tea and resting, she went for a walk. The sun was already
      setting. From the monastery garden came a moist fragrance of freshly
      watered mignonette, and from the church floated the soft singing of men’s
      voices, which seemed very pleasant and mournful in the distance. It was
      the evening service. In the dark windows where the little lamps glowed
      gently, in the shadows, in the figure of the old monk sitting at the
      church door with a collecting-box, there was such unruffled peace that the
      princess felt moved to tears.
    

      Outside the gate, in the walk between the wall and the birch-trees where
      there were benches, it was quite evening. The air grew rapidly darker and
      darker. The princess went along the walk, sat on a seat, and sank into
      thought.
    

      She thought how good it would be to settle down for her whole life in this
      monastery where life was as still and unruffled as a summer evening; how
      good it would be to forget the ungrateful, dissipated prince; to forget
      her immense estates, the creditors who worried her every day, her
      misfortunes, her maid Dasha, who had looked at her impertinently that
      morning. It would be nice to sit here on the bench all her life and watch
      through the trunks of the birch-trees the evening mist gathering in
      wreaths in the valley below; the rooks flying home in a black cloud like a
      veil far, far away above the forest; two novices, one astride a piebald
      horse, another on foot driving out the horses for the night and rejoicing
      in their freedom, playing pranks like little children; their youthful
      voices rang out musically in the still air, and she could distinguish
      every word. It is nice to sit and listen to the silence: at one moment the
      wind blows and stirs the tops of the birch-trees, then a frog rustles in
      last year’s leaves, then the clock on the belfry strikes the
      quarter. . . . One might sit without moving, listen and think, and think.
      . . .
    

      An old woman passed by with a wallet on her back. The princess thought
      that it would be nice to stop the old woman and to say something friendly
      and cordial to her, to help her. . . . But the old woman turned the corner
      without once looking round.
    

      Not long afterwards a tall man with a grey beard and a straw hat came
      along the walk. When he came up to the princess, he took off his hat and
      bowed. From the bald patch on his head and his sharp, hooked nose the
      princess recognised him as the doctor, Mihail Ivanovitch, who had been in
      her service at Dubovki. She remembered that some one had told her that his
      wife had died the year before, and she wanted to sympathise with him, to
      console him.
    

      “Doctor, I expect you don’t recognise me?” she said with
      an affable smile.
    

      “Yes, Princess, I recognised you,” said the doctor, taking off
      his hat again.
    

      “Oh, thank you; I was afraid that you, too, had forgotten your
      princess. People only remember their enemies, but they forget their
      friends. Have you, too, come to pray?”
    

      “I am the doctor here, and I have to spend the night at the
      monastery every Saturday.”
    

      “Well, how are you?” said the princess, sighing. “I hear
      that you have lost your wife. What a calamity!”
    

      “Yes, Princess, for me it is a great calamity.”
    

      “There’s nothing for it! We must bear our troubles with
      resignation. Not one hair of a man’s head is lost without the Divine
      Will.”
    

      “Yes, Princess.”
    

      To the princess’s friendly, gentle smile and her sighs the doctor
      responded coldly and dryly: “Yes, Princess.” And the
      expression of his face was cold and dry.
    

      “What else can I say to him?” she wondered.
    

      “How long it is since we met!” she said. “Five years!
      How much water has flowed under the bridge, how many changes in that time;
      it quite frightens one to think of it! You know, I am married. . . . I am
      not a countess now, but a princess. And by now I am separated from my
      husband too.”
    

      “Yes, I heard so.”
    

      “God has sent me many trials. No doubt you have heard, too, that I
      am almost ruined. My Dubovki, Sofyino, and Kiryakovo have all been sold
      for my unhappy husband’s debts. And I have only Baranovo and
      Mihaltsevo left. It’s terrible to look back: how many changes and
      misfortunes of all kinds, how many mistakes!”
    

      “Yes, Princess, many mistakes.”
    

      The princess was a little disconcerted. She knew her mistakes; they were
      all of such a private character that no one but she could think or speak
      of them. She could not resist asking:
    

      “What mistakes are you thinking about?”
    

      “You referred to them, so you know them . . .” answered the
      doctor, and he smiled. “Why talk about them!”
    

      “No; tell me, doctor. I shall be very grateful to you. And please
      don’t stand on ceremony with me. I love to hear the truth.”
    

      “I am not your judge, Princess.”
    

      “Not my judge! What a tone you take! You must know something about
      me. Tell me!”
    

      “If you really wish it, very well. Only I regret to say I’m
      not clever at talking, and people can’t always understand me.”
    

      The doctor thought a moment and began:
    

      “A lot of mistakes; but the most important of them, in my opinion,
      was the general spirit that prevailed on all your estates. You see, I don’t
      know how to express myself. I mean chiefly the lack of love, the aversion
      for people that was felt in absolutely everything. Your whole system of
      life was built upon that aversion. Aversion for the human voice, for
      faces, for heads, steps . . . in fact, for everything that makes up a
      human being. At all the doors and on the stairs there stand sleek, rude,
      and lazy grooms in livery to prevent badly dressed persons from entering
      the house; in the hall there are chairs with high backs so that the
      footmen waiting there, during balls and receptions, may not soil the walls
      with their heads; in every room there are thick carpets that no human step
      may be heard; every one who comes in is infallibly warned to speak as
      softly and as little as possible, and to say nothing that might have a
      disagreeable effect on the nerves or the imagination. And in your room you
      don’t shake hands with any one or ask him to sit down— just as
      you didn’t shake hands with me or ask me to sit down. . . .”
    

      “By all means, if you like,” said the princess, smiling and
      holding out her hand. “Really, to be cross about such trifles. . . .”
    

      “But I am not cross,” laughed the doctor, but at once he
      flushed, took off his hat, and waving it about, began hotly: “To be
      candid, I’ve long wanted an opportunity to tell you all I think. . .
      . That is, I want to tell you that you look upon the mass of mankind from
      the Napoleonic standpoint as food for the cannon. But Napoleon had at
      least some idea; you have nothing except aversion.”
    

      “I have an aversion for people?” smiled the princess,
      shrugging her shoulders in astonishment. “I have!”
    

      “Yes, you! You want facts? By all means. In Mihaltsevo three former
      cooks of yours, who have gone blind in your kitchens from the heat of the
      stove, are living upon charity. All the health and strength and good looks
      that is found on your hundreds of thousands of acres is taken by you and
      your parasites for your grooms, your footmen, and your coachmen. All these
      two-legged cattle are trained to be flunkeys, overeat themselves, grow
      coarse, lose the ‘image and likeness,’ in fact. . . . Young
      doctors, agricultural experts, teachers, intellectual workers generally—think
      of it!—are torn away from their honest work and forced for a crust
      of bread to take part in all sorts of mummeries which make every decent
      man feel ashamed! Some young men cannot be in your service for three years
      without becoming hypocrites, toadies, sneaks. . . . Is that a good thing?
      Your Polish superintendents, those abject spies, all those Kazimers and
      Kaetans, go hunting about on your hundreds of thousands of acres from
      morning to night, and to please you try to get three skins off one ox.
      Excuse me, I speak disconnectedly, but that doesn’t matter. You don’t
      look upon the simple people as human beings. And even the princes, counts,
      and bishops who used to come and see you, you looked upon simply as
      decorative figures, not as living beings. But the worst of all, the thing
      that most revolts me, is having a fortune of over a million and doing
      nothing for other people, nothing!”
    

      The princess sat amazed, aghast, offended, not knowing what to say or how
      to behave. She had never before been spoken to in such a tone. The doctor’s
      unpleasant, angry voice and his clumsy, faltering phrases made a harsh
      clattering noise in her ears and her head. Then she began to feel as
      though the gesticulating doctor was hitting her on the head with his hat.
    

      “It’s not true!” she articulated softly, in an imploring
      voice. “I’ve done a great deal of good for other people; you
      know it yourself!”
    

      “Nonsense!” cried the doctor. “Can you possibly go on
      thinking of your philanthropic work as something genuine and useful, and
      not a mere mummery? It was a farce from beginning to end; it was playing
      at loving your neighbour, the most open farce which even children and
      stupid peasant women saw through! Take for instance your— what was
      it called?—house for homeless old women without relations, of which
      you made me something like a head doctor, and of which you were the
      patroness. Mercy on us! What a charming institution it was! A house was
      built with parquet floors and a weathercock on the roof; a dozen old women
      were collected from the villages and made to sleep under blankets and
      sheets of Dutch linen, and given toffee to eat.”
    

      The doctor gave a malignant chuckle into his hat, and went on speaking
      rapidly and stammering:
    

      “It was a farce! The attendants kept the sheets and the blankets
      under lock and key, for fear the old women should soil them—‘Let
      the old devil’s pepper-pots sleep on the floor.’ The old women
      did not dare to sit down on the beds, to put on their jackets, to walk
      over the polished floors. Everything was kept for show and hidden away
      from the old women as though they were thieves, and the old women were
      clothed and fed on the sly by other people’s charity, and prayed to
      God night and day to be released from their prison and from the canting
      exhortations of the sleek rascals to whose care you committed them. And
      what did the managers do? It was simply charming! About twice a week there
      would be thirty-five thousand messages to say that the princess—that
      is, you—were coming to the home next day. That meant that next day I
      had to abandon my patients, dress up and be on parade. Very good; I
      arrive. The old women, in everything clean and new, are already drawn up
      in a row, waiting. Near them struts the old garrison rat—the
      superintendent with his mawkish, sneaking smile. The old women yawn and
      exchange glances, but are afraid to complain. We wait. The junior steward
      gallops up. Half an hour later the senior steward; then the superintendent
      of the accounts’ office, then another, and then another of them . .
      . they keep arriving endlessly. They all have mysterious, solemn faces. We
      wait and wait, shift from one leg to another, look at the clock—all
      this in monumental silence because we all hate each other like poison. One
      hour passes, then a second, and then at last the carriage is seen in the
      distance, and . . . and . . .”
    

      The doctor went off into a shrill laugh and brought out in a shrill voice:
    

      “You get out of the carriage, and the old hags, at the word of
      command from the old garrison rat, begin chanting: ‘The Glory of our
      Lord in Zion the tongue of man cannot express. . .’ A pretty scene,
      wasn’t it?”
    

      The doctor went off into a bass chuckle, and waved his hand as though to
      signify that he could not utter another word for laughing. He laughed
      heavily, harshly, with clenched teeth, as ill-natured people laugh; and
      from his voice, from his face, from his glittering, rather insolent eyes
      it could be seen that he had a profound contempt for the princess, for the
      home, and for the old women. There was nothing amusing or laughable in all
      that he described so clumsily and coarsely, but he laughed with
      satisfaction, even with delight.
    

      “And the school?” he went on, panting from laughter. “Do
      you remember how you wanted to teach peasant children yourself? You must
      have taught them very well, for very soon the children all ran away, so
      that they had to be thrashed and bribed to come and be taught. And you
      remember how you wanted to feed with your own hands the infants whose
      mothers were working in the fields. You went about the village crying
      because the infants were not at your disposal, as the mothers would take
      them to the fields with them. Then the village foreman ordered the mothers
      by turns to leave their infants behind for your entertainment. A strange
      thing! They all ran away from your benevolence like mice from a cat! And
      why was it? It’s very simple. Not because our people are ignorant
      and ungrateful, as you always explained it to yourself, but because in all
      your fads, if you’ll excuse the word, there wasn’t a ha’p’orth
      of love and kindness! There was nothing but the desire to amuse yourself
      with living puppets, nothing else. . . . A person who does not feel the
      difference between a human being and a lap-dog ought not to go in for
      philanthropy. I assure you, there’s a great difference between human
      beings and lap-dogs!”
    

      The princess’s heart was beating dreadfully; there was a thudding in
      her ears, and she still felt as though the doctor were beating her on the
      head with his hat. The doctor talked quickly, excitedly, and uncouthly,
      stammering and gesticulating unnecessarily. All she grasped was that she
      was spoken to by a coarse, ill-bred, spiteful, and ungrateful man; but
      what he wanted of her and what he was talking about, she could not
      understand.
    

      “Go away!” she said in a tearful voice, putting up her hands
      to protect her head from the doctor’s hat; “go away!”
    

      “And how you treat your servants!” the doctor went on,
      indignantly. “You treat them as the lowest scoundrels, and don’t
      look upon them as human beings. For example, allow me to ask, why did you
      dismiss me? For ten years I worked for your father and afterwards for you,
      honestly, without vacations or holidays. I gained the love of all for more
      than seventy miles round, and suddenly one fine day I am informed that I
      am no longer wanted. What for? I’ve no idea to this day. I, a doctor
      of medicine, a gentleman by birth, a student of the Moscow University,
      father of a family—am such a petty, insignificant insect that you
      can kick me out without explaining the reason! Why stand on ceremony with
      me! I heard afterwards that my wife went without my knowledge three times
      to intercede with you for me—you wouldn’t receive her. I am
      told she cried in your hall. And I shall never forgive her for it, never!”
    

      The doctor paused and clenched his teeth, making an intense effort to
      think of something more to say, very unpleasant and vindictive. He thought
      of something, and his cold, frowning face suddenly brightened.
    

      “Take your attitude to this monastery!” he said with avidity.
      “You’ve never spared any one, and the holier the place, the
      more chance of its suffering from your loving-kindness and angelic
      sweetness. Why do you come here? What do you want with the monks here,
      allow me to ask you? What is Hecuba to you or you to Hecuba? It’s
      another farce, another amusement for you, another sacrilege against human
      dignity, and nothing more. Why, you don’t believe in the monks’
      God; you’ve a God of your own in your heart, whom you’ve
      evolved for yourself at spiritualist sÃ©ances. You look with condescension
      upon the ritual of the Church; you don’t go to mass or vespers; you
      sleep till midday. . . . Why do you come here? . . . You come with a God
      of your own into a monastery you have nothing to do with, and you imagine
      that the monks look upon it as a very great honour. To be sure they do!
      You’d better ask, by the way, what your visits cost the monastery.
      You were graciously pleased to arrive here this evening, and a messenger
      from your estate arrived on horseback the day before yesterday to warn
      them of your coming. They were the whole day yesterday getting the rooms
      ready and expecting you. This morning your advance-guard arrived—an
      insolent maid, who keeps running across the courtyard, rustling her
      skirts, pestering them with questions, giving orders. . . . I can’t
      endure it! The monks have been on the lookout all day, for if you were not
      met with due ceremony, there would be trouble! You’d complain to the
      bishop! ‘The monks don’t like me, your holiness; I don’t
      know what I’ve done to displease them. It’s true I’m a
      great sinner, but I’m so unhappy!’ Already one monastery has
      been in hot water over you. The Father Superior is a busy, learned man; he
      hasn’t a free moment, and you keep sending for him to come to your
      rooms. Not a trace of respect for age or for rank! If at least you were a
      bountiful giver to the monastery, one wouldn’t resent it so much,
      but all this time the monks have not received a hundred roubles from you!”
    

      Whenever people worried the princess, misunderstood her, or mortified her,
      and when she did not know what to say or do, she usually began to cry. And
      on this occasion, too, she ended by hiding her face in her hands and
      crying aloud in a thin treble like a child. The doctor suddenly stopped
      and looked at her. His face darkened and grew stern.
    

      “Forgive me, Princess,” he said in a hollow voice. “I’ve
      given way to a malicious feeling and forgotten myself. It was not right.”
    

      And coughing in an embarrassed way, he walked away quickly, without
      remembering to put his hat on.
    

      Stars were already twinkling in the sky. The moon must have been rising on
      the further side of the monastery, for the sky was clear, soft, and
      transparent. Bats were flitting noiselessly along the white monastery
      wall.
    

      The clock slowly struck three quarters, probably a quarter to nine. The
      princess got up and walked slowly to the gate. She felt wounded and was
      crying, and she felt that the trees and the stars and even the bats were
      pitying her, and that the clock struck musically only to express its
      sympathy with her. She cried and thought how nice it would be to go into a
      monastery for the rest of her life. On still summer evenings she would
      walk alone through the avenues, insulted, injured, misunderstood by
      people, and only God and the starry heavens would see the martyr’s
      tears. The evening service was still going on in the church. The princess
      stopped and listened to the singing; how beautiful the singing sounded in
      the still darkness! How sweet to weep and suffer to the sound of that
      singing!
    

      Going into her rooms, she looked at her tear-stained face in the glass and
      powdered it, then she sat down to supper. The monks knew that she liked
      pickled sturgeon, little mushrooms, Malaga and plain honey-cakes that left
      a taste of cypress in the mouth, and every time she came they gave her all
      these dishes. As she ate the mushrooms and drank the Malaga, the princess
      dreamed of how she would be finally ruined and deserted—how all her
      stewards, bailiffs, clerks, and maid-servants for whom she had done so
      much, would be false to her, and begin to say rude things; how people all
      the world over would set upon her, speak ill of her, jeer at her. She
      would renounce her title, would renounce society and luxury, and would go
      into a convent without one word of reproach to any one; she would pray for
      her enemies—and then they would all understand her and come to beg
      her forgiveness, but by that time it would be too late. . . .
    

      After supper she knelt down in the corner before the ikon and read two
      chapters of the Gospel. Then her maid made her bed and she got into it.
      Stretching herself under the white quilt, she heaved a sweet, deep sigh,
      as one sighs after crying, closed her eyes, and began to fall asleep.
    

      In the morning she waked up and glanced at her watch. It was half-past
      nine. On the carpet near the bed was a bright, narrow streak of sunlight
      from a ray which came in at the window and dimly lighted up the room.
      Flies were buzzing behind the black curtain at the window. “It’s
      early,” thought the princess, and she closed her eyes.
    

      Stretching and lying snug in her bed, she recalled her meeting yesterday
      with the doctor and all the thoughts with which she had gone to sleep the
      night before: she remembered she was unhappy. Then she thought of her
      husband living in Petersburg, her stewards, doctors, neighbours, the
      officials of her acquaintance . . . a long procession of familiar
      masculine faces passed before her imagination. She smiled and thought, if
      only these people could see into her heart and understand her, they would
      all be at her feet.
    

      At a quarter past eleven she called her maid.
    

      “Help me to dress, Dasha,” she said languidly. “But go
      first and tell them to get out the horses. I must set off for Klavdia
      Nikolaevna’s.”
    

      Going out to get into the carriage, she bGlinked at the glaring daylight
      and laughed with pleasure: it was a wonderfully fine day! As she scanned
      from her half-closed eyes the monks who had gathered round the steps to
      see her off, she nodded graciously and said:
    

      “Good-bye, my friends! Till the day after tomorrow.”
    

      It was an agreeable surprise to her that the doctor was with the monks by
      the steps. His face was pale and severe.
    

      “Princess,” he said with a guilty smile, taking off his hat,
      “I’ve been waiting here a long time to see you. Forgive me,
      for God’s sake. . . . I was carried away yesterday by an evil,
      vindictive feeling and I talked . . . nonsense. In short, I beg your
      pardon.”
    

      The princess smiled graciously, and held out her hand for him to kiss. He
      kissed it, turning red.
    

      Trying to look like a bird, the princess fluttered into the carriage and
      nodded in all directions. There was a gay, warm, serene feeling in her
      heart, and she felt herself that her smile was particularly soft and
      friendly. As the carriage rolled towards the gates, and afterwards along
      the dusty road past huts and gardens, past long trains of waggons and
      strings of pilgrims on their way to the monastery, she still screwed up
      her eyes and smiled softly. She was thinking there was no higher bliss
      than to bring warmth, light, and joy wherever one went, to forgive
      injuries, to smile graciously on one’s enemies. The peasants she
      passed bowed to her, the carriage rustled softly, clouds of dust rose from
      under the wheels and floated over the golden rye, and it seemed to the
      princess that her body was swaying not on carriage cushions but on clouds,
      and that she herself was like a light, transparent little cloud. . . .
    

      “How happy I am!” she murmured, shutting her eyes. “How
      happy I am!”
    











      THE CHEMIST’S WIFE
    

THE little town of
      B——, consisting of two or three crooked streets, was sound
      asleep. There was a complete stillness in the motionless air. Nothing
      could be heard but far away, outside the town no doubt, the barking of a
      dog in a thin, hoarse tenor. It was close upon daybreak.
    

      Everything had long been asleep. The only person not asleep was the young
      wife of Tchernomordik, a qualified dispenser who kept a chemist’s
      shop at B——. She had gone to bed and got up again three times,
      but could not sleep, she did not know why. She sat at the open window in
      her nightdress and looked into the street. She felt bored, depressed,
      vexed . . . so vexed that she felt quite inclined to cry—again she
      did not know why. There seemed to be a lump in her chest that kept rising
      into her throat. . . . A few paces behind her Tchernomordik lay curled up
      close to the wall, snoring sweetly. A greedy flea was stabbing the bridge
      of his nose, but he did not feel it, and was positively smiling, for he
      was dreaming that every one in the town had a cough, and was buying from
      him the King of Denmark’s cough-drops. He could not have been
      wakened now by pinpricks or by cannon or by caresses.
    

      The chemist’s shop was almost at the extreme end of the town, so
      that the chemist’s wife could see far into the fields. She could see
      the eastern horizon growing pale by degrees, then turning crimson as
      though from a great fire. A big broad-faced moon peeped out unexpectedly
      from behind bushes in the distance. It was red (as a rule when the moon
      emerges from behind bushes it appears to be blushing).
    

      Suddenly in the stillness of the night there came the sounds of footsteps
      and a jingle of spurs. She could hear voices.
    

      “That must be the officers going home to the camp from the Police
      Captain’s,” thought the chemist’s wife.
    

      Soon afterwards two figures wearing officers’ white tunics came into
      sight: one big and tall, the other thinner and shorter. . . . They
      slouched along by the fence, dragging one leg after the other and talking
      loudly together. As they passed the chemist’s shop, they walked more
      slowly than ever, and glanced up at the windows.
    

      “It smells like a chemist’s,” said the thin one. “And
      so it is! Ah, I remember. . . . I came here last week to buy some
      castor-oil. There’s a chemist here with a sour face and the jawbone
      of an ass! Such a jawbone, my dear fellow! It must have been a jawbone
      like that Samson killed the Philistines with.”
    

      “M’yes,” said the big one in a bass voice. “The
      pharmacist is asleep. And his wife is asleep too. She is a pretty woman,
      Obtyosov.”
    

      “I saw her. I liked her very much. . . . Tell me, doctor, can she
      possibly love that jawbone of an ass? Can she?”
    

      “No, most likely she does not love him,” sighed the doctor,
      speaking as though he were sorry for the chemist. “The little woman
      is asleep behind the window, Obtyosov, what? Tossing with the heat, her
      little mouth half open . . . and one little foot hanging out of bed. I bet
      that fool the chemist doesn’t realise what a lucky fellow he is. . .
      . No doubt he sees no difference between a woman and a bottle of carbolic!”
    

      “I say, doctor,” said the officer, stopping. “Let us go
      into the shop and buy something. Perhaps we shall see her.”
    

      “What an idea—in the night!”
    

      “What of it? They are obliged to serve one even at night. My dear
      fellow, let us go in!”
    

      “If you like. . . .”
    

      The chemist’s wife, hiding behind the curtain, heard a muffled ring.
      Looking round at her husband, who was smiling and snoring sweetly as
      before, she threw on her dress, slid her bare feet into her slippers, and
      ran to the shop.
    

      On the other side of the glass door she could see two shadows. The chemist’s
      wife turned up the lamp and hurried to the door to open it, and now she
      felt neither vexed nor bored nor inclined to cry, though her heart was
      thumping. The big doctor and the slender Obtyosov walked in. Now she could
      get a view of them. The doctor was corpulent and swarthy; he wore a beard
      and was slow in his movements. At the slightest motion his tunic seemed as
      though it would crack, and perspiration came on to his face. The officer
      was rosy, clean-shaven, feminine-looking, and as supple as an English
      whip.
    

      “What may I give you?” asked the chemist’s wife, holding
      her dress across her bosom.
    

      “Give us . . . er-er . . . four pennyworth of peppermint lozenges!”
    

      Without haste the chemist’s wife took down a jar from a shelf and
      began weighing out lozenges. The customers stared fixedly at her back; the
      doctor screwed up his eyes like a well-fed cat, while the lieutenant was
      very grave.
    

      “It’s the first time I’ve seen a lady serving in a
      chemist’s shop,” observed the doctor.
    

      “There’s nothing out of the way in it,” replied the
      chemist’s wife, looking out of the corner of her eye at the
      rosy-cheeked officer. “My husband has no assistant, and I always
      help him.”
    

      “To be sure. . . . You have a charming little shop! What a number of
      different . . . jars! And you are not afraid of moving about among the
      poisons? Brrr!”
    

      The chemist’s wife sealed up the parcel and handed it to the doctor.
      Obtyosov gave her the money. Half a minute of silence followed. . . . The
      men exchanged glances, took a step towards the door, then looked at one
      another again.
    

      “Will you give me two pennyworth of soda?” said the doctor.
    

      Again the chemist’s wife slowly and languidly raised her hand to the
      shelf.
    

      “Haven’t you in the shop anything . . . such as . . .”
      muttered Obtyosov, moving his fingers, “something, so to say,
      allegorical . . . revivifying . . . seltzer-water, for instance. Have you
      any seltzer-water?”
    

      “Yes,” answered the chemist’s wife.
    

      “Bravo! You’re a fairy, not a woman! Give us three bottles!”
    

      The chemist’s wife hurriedly sealed up the soda and vanished through
      the door into the darkness.
    

      “A peach!” said the doctor, with a wink. “You wouldn’t
      find a pineapple like that in the island of Madeira! Eh? What do you say?
      Do you hear the snoring, though? That’s his worship the chemist
      enjoying sweet repose.”
    

      A minute later the chemist’s wife came back and set five bottles on
      the counter. She had just been in the cellar, and so was flushed and
      rather excited.
    

      “Sh-sh! . . . quietly!” said Obtyosov when, after uncorking
      the bottles, she dropped the corkscrew. “Don’t make such a
      noise; you’ll wake your husband.”
    

      “Well, what if I do wake him?”
    

      “He is sleeping so sweetly . . . he must be dreaming of you. . . .
      To your health!”
    

      “Besides,” boomed the doctor, hiccupping after the
      seltzer-water, “husbands are such a dull business that it would be
      very nice of them to be always asleep. How good a drop of red wine would
      be in this water!”
    

      “What an idea!” laughed the chemist’s wife.
    

      “That would be splendid. What a pity they don’t sell spirits
      in chemist’s shops! Though you ought to sell wine as a medicine.
      Have you any vinum gallicum rubrum?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Well, then, give us some! Bring it here, damn it!”
    

      “How much do you want?”
    

      “Quantum satis. . . . Give us an ounce each in the water, and
      afterwards we’ll see. . . . Obtyosov, what do you say? First with
      water and afterwards per se. . . .”
    

      The doctor and Obtyosov sat down to the counter, took off their caps, and
      began drinking the wine.
    

      “The wine, one must admit, is wretched stuff! Vinum nastissimum!
      Though in the presence of . . . er . . . it tastes like nectar. You are
      enchanting, madam! In imagination I kiss your hand.”
    

      “I would give a great deal to do so not in imagination,” said
      Obtyosov. “On my honour, I’d give my life.”
    

      “That’s enough,” said Madame Tchernomordik, flushing and
      assuming a serious expression.
    

      “What a flirt you are, though!” the doctor laughed softly,
      looking slyly at her from under his brows. “Your eyes seem to be
      firing shot: piff-paff! I congratulate you: you’ve conquered! We are
      vanquished!”
    

      The chemist’s wife looked at their ruddy faces, listened to their
      chatter, and soon she, too, grew quite lively. Oh, she felt so gay! She
      entered into the conversation, she laughed, flirted, and even, after
      repeated requests from the customers, drank two ounces of wine.
    

      “You officers ought to come in oftener from the camp,” she
      said; “it’s awful how dreary it is here. I’m simply
      dying of it.”
    

      “I should think so!” said the doctor indignantly. “Such
      a peach, a miracle of nature, thrown away in the wilds! How well
      Griboyedov said, ‘Into the wilds, to Saratov’! It’s time
      for us to be off, though. Delighted to have made your acquaintance . . .
      very. How much do we owe you?”
    

      The chemist’s wife raised her eyes to the ceiling and her lips moved
      for some time.
    

      “Twelve roubles forty-eight kopecks,” she said.
    

      Obtyosov took out of his pocket a fat pocket-book, and after fumbling for
      some time among the notes, paid.
    

      “Your husband’s sleeping sweetly . . . he must be dreaming,”
      he muttered, pressing her hand at parting.
    

      “I don’t like to hear silly remarks. . . .”
    

      “What silly remarks? On the contrary, it’s not silly at all .
      . . even Shakespeare said: ‘Happy is he who in his youth is young.’”
    

      “Let go of my hand.”
    

      At last after much talk and after kissing the lady’s hand at
      parting, the customers went out of the shop irresolutely, as though they
      were wondering whether they had not forgotten something.
    

      She ran quickly into the bedroom and sat down in the same place. She saw
      the doctor and the officer, on coming out of the shop, walk lazily away a
      distance of twenty paces; then they stopped and began whispering together.
      What about? Her heart throbbed, there was a pulsing in her temples, and
      why she did not know. . . . Her heart beat violently as though those two
      whispering outside were deciding her fate.
    

      Five minutes later the doctor parted from Obtyosov and walked on, while
      Obtyosov came back. He walked past the shop once and a second time. . . .
      He would stop near the door and then take a few steps again. At last the
      bell tinkled discreetly.
    

      “What? Who is there?” the chemist’s wife heard her
      husband’s voice suddenly. “There’s a ring at the bell,
      and you don’t hear it,” he said severely. “Is that the
      way to do things?”
    

      He got up, put on his dressing-gown, and staggering, half asleep, flopped
      in his slippers to the shop.
    

      “What . . . is it?” he asked Obtyosov.
    

      “Give me . . . give me four pennyworth of peppermint lozenges.”
    

      Sniffing continually, yawning, dropping asleep as he moved, and knocking
      his knees against the counter, the chemist went to the shelf and reached
      down the jar.
    

      Two minutes later the chemist’s wife saw Obtyosov go out of the
      shop, and, after he had gone some steps, she saw him throw the packet of
      peppermints on the dusty road. The doctor came from behind a corner to
      meet him. . . . They met and, gesticulating, vanished in the morning mist.
    

      “How unhappy I am!” said the chemist’s wife, looking
      angrily at her husband, who was undressing quickly to get into bed again.
      “Oh, how unhappy I am!” she repeated, suddenly melting into
      bitter tears. “And nobody knows, nobody knows. . . .”
    

      “I forgot fourpence on the counter,” muttered the chemist,
      pulling the quilt over him. “Put it away in the till, please. . . .”
    

      And at once he fell asleep again.
    

 


The Schoolmistress and Other Stories

 



  


      THE SCHOOLMISTRESS
    

AT half-past eight
      they drove out of the town.
    

      The highroad was dry, a lovely April sun was shining warmly, but the snow
      was still lying in the ditches and in the woods. Winter, dark, long, and
      spiteful, was hardly over; spring had come all of a sudden. But neither
      the warmth nor the languid transparent woods, warmed by the breath of
      spring, nor the black flocks of birds flying over the huge puddles that
      were like lakes, nor the marvelous fathomless sky, into which it seemed
      one would have gone away so joyfully, presented anything new or
      interesting to Marya Vassilyevna who was sitting in the cart. For thirteen
      years she had been schoolmistress, and there was no reckoning how many
      times during all those years she had been to the town for her salary; and
      whether it were spring as now, or a rainy autumn evening, or winter, it
      was all the same to her, and she always—invariably—longed for
      one thing only, to get to the end of her journey as quickly as could be.
    

      She felt as though she had been living in that part of the country for
      ages and ages, for a hundred years, and it seemed to her that she knew
      every stone, every tree on the road from the town to her school. Her past
      was here, her present was here, and she could imagine no other future than
      the school, the road to the town and back again, and again the school and
      again the road....
    

      She had got out of the habit of thinking of her past before she became a
      schoolmistress, and had almost forgotten it. She had once had a father and
      mother; they had lived in Moscow in a big flat near the Red Gate, but of
      all that life there was left in her memory only something vague and fluid
      like a dream. Her father had died when she was ten years old, and her
      mother had died soon after.... She had a brother, an officer; at first
      they used to write to each other, then her brother had given up answering
      her letters, he had got out of the way of writing. Of her old belongings,
      all that was left was a photograph of her mother, but it had grown dim
      from the dampness of the school, and now nothing could be seen but the
      hair and the eyebrows.
    

      When they had driven a couple of miles, old Semyon, who was driving,
      turned round and said:
    

      “They have caught a government clerk in the town. They have taken
      him away. The story is that with some Germans he killed Alexeyev, the
      Mayor, in Moscow.”
    

      “Who told you that?”
    

      “They were reading it in the paper, in Ivan Ionov’s tavern.”
    

      And again they were silent for a long time. Marya Vassilyevna thought of
      her school, of the examination that was coming soon, and of the girl and
      four boys she was sending up for it. And just as she was thinking about
      the examination, she was overtaken by a neighboring landowner called Hanov
      in a carriage with four horses, the very man who had been examiner in her
      school the year before. When he came up to her he recognized her and
      bowed.
    

      “Good-morning,” he said to her. “You are driving home, I
      suppose.”
    

      This Hanov, a man of forty with a listless expression and a face that
      showed signs of wear, was beginning to look old, but was still handsome
      and admired by women. He lived in his big homestead alone, and was not in
      the service; and people used to say of him that he did nothing at home but
      walk up and down the room whistling, or play chess with his old footman.
      People said, too, that he drank heavily. And indeed at the examination the
      year before the very papers he brought with him smelt of wine and scent.
      He had been dressed all in new clothes on that occasion, and Marya
      Vassilyevna thought him very attractive, and all the while she sat beside
      him she had felt embarrassed. She was accustomed to see frigid and
      sensible examiners at the school, while this one did not remember a single
      prayer, or know what to ask questions about, and was exceedingly courteous
      and delicate, giving nothing but the highest marks.
    

      “I am going to visit Bakvist,” he went on, addressing Marya
      Vassilyevna, “but I am told he is not at home.”
    

      They turned off the highroad into a by-road to the village, Hanov leading
      the way and Semyon following. The four horses moved at a walking pace,
      with effort dragging the heavy carriage through the mud. Semyon tacked
      from side to side, keeping to the edge of the road, at one time through a
      snowdrift, at another through a pool, often jumping out of the cart and
      helping the horse. Marya Vassilyevna was still thinking about the school,
      wondering whether the arithmetic questions at the examination would be
      difficult or easy. And she felt annoyed with the Zemstvo board at which
      she had found no one the day before. How unbusiness-like! Here she had
      been asking them for the last two years to dismiss the watchman, who did
      nothing, was rude to her, and hit the schoolboys; but no one paid any
      attention. It was hard to find the president at the office, and when one
      did find him he would say with tears in his eyes that he hadn’t a
      moment to spare; the inspector visited the school at most once in three
      years, and knew nothing whatever about his work, as he had been in the
      Excise Duties Department, and had received the post of school inspector
      through influence. The School Council met very rarely, and there was no
      knowing where it met; the school guardian was an almost illiterate
      peasant, the head of a tanning business, unintelligent, rude, and a great
      friend of the watchman’s—and goodness knows to whom she could
      appeal with complaints or inquiries....
    

      “He really is handsome,” she thought, glancing at Hanov.
    

      The road grew worse and worse.... They drove into the wood. Here there was
      no room to turn round, the wheels sank deeply in, water splashed and
      gurgled through them, and sharp twigs struck them in the face.
    

      “What a road!” said Hanov, and he laughed.
    

      The schoolmistress looked at him and could not understand why this queer
      man lived here. What could his money, his interesting appearance, his
      refined bearing do for him here, in this mud, in this God-forsaken, dreary
      place? He got no special advantages out of life, and here, like Semyon,
      was driving at a jog-trot on an appalling road and enduring the same
      discomforts. Why live here if one could live in Petersburg or abroad? And
      one would have thought it would be nothing for a rich man like him to make
      a good road instead of this bad one, to avoid enduring this misery and
      seeing the despair on the faces of his coachman and Semyon; but he only
      laughed, and apparently did not mind, and wanted no better life. He was
      kind, soft, naive, and he did not understand this coarse life, just as at
      the examination he did not know the prayers. He subscribed nothing to the
      schools but globes, and genuinely regarded himself as a useful person and
      a prominent worker in the cause of popular education. And what use were
      his globes here?
    

      “Hold on, Vassilyevna!” said Semyon.
    

      The cart lurched violently and was on the point of upsetting; something
      heavy rolled on to Marya Vassilyevna’s feet—it was her parcel
      of purchases. There was a steep ascent uphill through the clay; here in
      the winding ditches rivulets were gurgling. The water seemed to have
      gnawed away the road; and how could one get along here! The horses
      breathed hard. Hanov got out of his carriage and walked at the side of the
      road in his long overcoat. He was hot.
    

      “What a road!” he said, and laughed again. “It would
      soon smash up one’s carriage.”
    

      “Nobody obliges you to drive about in such weather,” said
      Semyon surlily. “You should stay at home.”
    

      “I am dull at home, grandfather. I don’t like staying at home.”
    

      Beside old Semyon he looked graceful and vigorous, but yet in his walk
      there was something just perceptible which betrayed in him a being already
      touched by decay, weak, and on the road to ruin. And all at once there was
      a whiff of spirits in the wood. Marya Vassilyevna was filled with dread
      and pity for this man going to his ruin for no visible cause or reason,
      and it came into her mind that if she had been his wife or sister she
      would have devoted her whole life to saving him from ruin. His wife! Life
      was so ordered that here he was living in his great house alone, and she
      was living in a God-forsaken village alone, and yet for some reason the
      mere thought that he and she might be close to one another and equals
      seemed impossible and absurd. In reality, life was arranged and human
      relations were complicated so utterly beyond all understanding that when
      one thought about it one felt uncanny and one’s heart sank.
    

      “And it is beyond all understanding,” she thought, “why
      God gives beauty, this graciousness, and sad, sweet eyes to weak, unlucky,
      useless people—why they are so charming.”
    

      “Here we must turn off to the right,” said Hanov, getting into
      his carriage. “Good-by! I wish you all things good!”
    

      And again she thought of her pupils, of the examination, of the watchman,
      of the School Council; and when the wind brought the sound of the
      retreating carriage these thoughts were mingled with others. She longed to
      think of beautiful eyes, of love, of the happiness which would never
      be....
    

      His wife? It was cold in the morning, there was no one to heat the stove,
      the watchman disappeared; the children came in as soon as it was light,
      bringing in snow and mud and making a noise: it was all so inconvenient,
      so comfortless. Her abode consisted of one little room and the kitchen
      close by. Her head ached every day after her work, and after dinner she
      had heart-burn. She had to collect money from the school-children for wood
      and for the watchman, and to give it to the school guardian, and then to
      entreat him—that overfed, insolent peasant—for God’s
      sake to send her wood. And at night she dreamed of examinations, peasants,
      snowdrifts. And this life was making her grow old and coarse, making her
      ugly, angular, and awkward, as though she were made of lead. She was
      always afraid, and she would get up from her seat and not venture to sit
      down in the presence of a member of the Zemstvo or the school guardian.
      And she used formal, deferential expressions when she spoke of any one of
      them. And no one thought her attractive, and life was passing drearily,
      without affection, without friendly sympathy, without interesting
      acquaintances. How awful it would have been in her position if she had
      fallen in love!
    

      “Hold on, Vassilyevna!”
    

      Again a sharp ascent uphill....
    

      She had become a schoolmistress from necessity, without feeling any
      vocation for it; and she had never thought of a vocation, of serving the
      cause of enlightenment; and it always seemed to her that what was most
      important in her work was not the children, nor enlightenment, but the
      examinations. And what time had she for thinking of vocation, of serving
      the cause of enlightenment? Teachers, badly paid doctors, and their
      assistants, with their terribly hard work, have not even the comfort of
      thinking that they are serving an idea or the people, as their heads are
      always stuffed with thoughts of their daily bread, of wood for the fire,
      of bad roads, of illnesses. It is a hard-working, an uninteresting life,
      and only silent, patient cart-horses like Mary Vassilyevna could put up
      with it for long; the lively, nervous, impressionable people who talked
      about vocation and serving the idea were soon weary of it and gave up the
      work.
    

      Semyon kept picking out the driest and shortest way, first by a meadow,
      then by the backs of the village huts; but in one place the peasants would
      not let them pass, in another it was the priest’s land and they
      could not cross it, in another Ivan Ionov had bought a plot from the
      landowner and had dug a ditch round it. They kept having to turn back.
    

      They reached Nizhneye Gorodistche. Near the tavern on the dung-strewn
      earth, where the snow was still lying, there stood wagons that had brought
      great bottles of crude sulphuric acid. There were a great many people in
      the tavern, all drivers, and there was a smell of vodka, tobacco, and
      sheepskins. There was a loud noise of conversation and the banging of the
      swing-door. Through the wall, without ceasing for a moment, came the sound
      of a concertina being played in the shop. Marya Vassilyevna sat down and
      drank some tea, while at the next table peasants were drinking vodka and
      beer, perspiring from the tea they had just swallowed and the stifling
      fumes of the tavern.
    

      “I say, Kuzma!” voices kept shouting in confusion. “What
      there!” “The Lord bless us!” “Ivan Dementyitch, I
      can tell you that!” “Look out, old man!”
    

      A little pock-marked man with a black beard, who was quite drunk, was
      suddenly surprised by something and began using bad language.
    

      “What are you swearing at, you there?” Semyon, who was sitting
      some way off, responded angrily. “Don’t you see the young
      lady?”
    

      “The young lady!” someone mimicked in another corner.
    

      “Swinish crow!”
    

      “We meant nothing...” said the little man in confusion.
      “I beg your pardon. We pay with our money and the young lady with
      hers. Good-morning!”
    

      “Good-morning,” answered the schoolmistress.
    

      “And we thank you most feelingly.”
    

      Marya Vassilyevna drank her tea with satisfaction, and she, too, began
      turning red like the peasants, and fell to thinking again about firewood,
      about the watchman....
    

      “Stay, old man,” she heard from the next table, “it’s
      the schoolmistress from Vyazovye.... We know her; she’s a good young
      lady.”
    

      “She’s all right!”
    

      The swing-door was continually banging, some coming in, others going out.
      Marya Vassilyevna sat on, thinking all the time of the same things, while
      the concertina went on playing and playing. The patches of sunshine had
      been on the floor, then they passed to the counter, to the wall, and
      disappeared altogether; so by the sun it was past midday. The peasants at
      the next table were getting ready to go. The little man, somewhat
      unsteadily, went up to Marya Vassilyevna and held out his hand to her;
      following his example, the others shook hands, too, at parting, and went
      out one after another, and the swing-door squeaked and slammed nine times.
    

      “Vassilyevna, get ready,” Semyon called to her.
    

      They set off. And again they went at a walking pace.
    

      “A little while back they were building a school here in their
      Nizhneye Gorodistche,” said Semyon, turning round. “It was a
      wicked thing that was done!”
    

      “Why, what?”
    

      “They say the president put a thousand in his pocket, and the school
      guardian another thousand in his, and the teacher five hundred.”
    

      “The whole school only cost a thousand. It’s wrong to slander
      people, grandfather. That’s all nonsense.”
    

      “I don’t know,... I only tell you what folks say.”
    

      But it was clear that Semyon did not believe the schoolmistress. The
      peasants did not believe her. They always thought she received too large a
      salary, twenty-one roubles a month (five would have been enough), and that
      of the money that she collected from the children for the firewood and the
      watchman the greater part she kept for herself. The guardian thought the
      same as the peasants, and he himself made a profit off the firewood and
      received payments from the peasants for being a guardian—without the
      knowledge of the authorities.
    

      The forest, thank God! was behind them, and now it would be flat, open
      ground all the way to Vyazovye, and there was not far to go now. They had
      to cross the river and then the railway line, and then Vyazovye was in
      sight.
    

      “Where are you driving?” Marya Vassilyevna asked Semyon.
      “Take the road to the right to the bridge.”
    

      “Why, we can go this way as well. It’s not deep enough to
      matter.”
    

      “Mind you don’t drown the horse.”
    

      “What?”
    

      “Look, Hanov is driving to the bridge,” said Marya
      Vassilyevna, seeing the four horses far away to the right. “It is
      he, I think.”
    

      “It is. So he didn’t find Bakvist at home. What a pig-headed
      fellow he is. Lord have mercy upon us! He’s driven over there, and
      what for? It’s fully two miles nearer this way.”
    

      They reached the river. In the summer it was a little stream easily
      crossed by wading. It usually dried up in August, but now, after the
      spring floods, it was a river forty feet in breadth, rapid, muddy, and
      cold; on the bank and right up to the water there were fresh tracks of
      wheels, so it had been crossed here.
    

      “Go on!” shouted Semyon angrily and anxiously, tugging
      violently at the reins and jerking his elbows as a bird does its wings.
      “Go on!”
    

      The horse went on into the water up to his belly and stopped, but at once
      went on again with an effort, and Marya Vassilyevna was aware of a keen
      chilliness in her feet.
    

      “Go on!” she, too, shouted, getting up. “Go on!”
    

      They got out on the bank.
    

      “Nice mess it is, Lord have mercy upon us!” muttered Semyon,
      setting straight the harness. “It’s a perfect plague with this
      Zemstvo....”
    

      Her shoes and goloshes were full of water, the lower part of her dress and
      of her coat and one sleeve were wet and dripping: the sugar and flour had
      got wet, and that was worst of all, and Marya Vassilyevna could only clasp
      her hands in despair and say:
    

      “Oh, Semyon, Semyon! How tiresome you are really!...”
    

      The barrier was down at the railway crossing. A train was coming out of
      the station. Marya Vassilyevna stood at the crossing waiting till it
      should pass, and shivering all over with cold. Vyazovye was in sight now,
      and the school with the green roof, and the church with its crosses
      flashing in the evening sun: and the station windows flashed too, and a
      pink smoke rose from the engine... and it seemed to her that everything
      was trembling with cold.
    

      Here was the train; the windows reflected the gleaming light like the
      crosses on the church: it made her eyes ache to look at them. On the
      little platform between two first-class carriages a lady was standing, and
      Marya Vassilyevna glanced at her as she passed. Her mother! What a
      resemblance! Her mother had had just such luxuriant hair, just such a brow
      and bend of the head. And with amazing distinctness, for the first time in
      those thirteen years, there rose before her mind a vivid picture of her
      mother, her father, her brother, their flat in Moscow, the aquarium with
      little fish, everything to the tiniest detail; she heard the sound of the
      piano, her father’s voice; she felt as she had been then, young,
      good-looking, well-dressed, in a bright warm room among her own people. A
      feeling of joy and happiness suddenly came over her, she pressed her hands
      to her temples in an ecstacy, and called softly, beseechingly:
    

      “Mother!”
    

      And she began crying, she did not know why. Just at that instant Hanov
      drove up with his team of four horses, and seeing him she imagined
      happiness such as she had never had, and smiled and nodded to him as an
      equal and a friend, and it seemed to her that her happiness, her triumph,
      was glowing in the sky and on all sides, in the windows and on the trees.
      Her father and mother had never died, she had never been a schoolmistress,
      it was a long, tedious, strange dream, and now she had awakened....
    

      “Vassilyevna, get in!”
    

      And at once it all vanished. The barrier was slowly raised. Marya
      Vassilyevna, shivering and numb with cold, got into the cart. The carriage
      with the four horses crossed the railway line; Semyon followed it. The
      signalman took off his cap.
    

      “And here is Vyazovye. Here we are.”
    







      A NERVOUS BREAKDOWN
    

A MEDICAL student
      called Mayer, and a pupil of the Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture, and
      Architecture called Rybnikov, went one evening to see their friend
      Vassilyev, a law student, and suggested that he should go with them to S.
      Street. For a long time Vassilyev would not consent to go, but in the end
      he put on his greatcoat and went with them.
    

      He knew nothing of fallen women except by hearsay and from books, and he
      had never in his life been in the houses in which they live. He knew that
      there are immoral women who, under the pressure of fatal circumstances—environment,
      bad education, poverty, and so on—are forced to sell their honor for
      money. They know nothing of pure love, have no children, have no civil
      rights; their mothers and sisters weep over them as though they were dead,
      science treats of them as an evil, men address them with contemptuous
      familiarity. But in spite of all that, they do not lose the semblance and
      image of God. They all acknowledge their sin and hope for salvation. Of
      the means that lead to salvation they can avail themselves to the fullest
      extent. Society, it is true, will not forgive people their past, but in
      the sight of God St. Mary of Egypt is no lower than the other saints. When
      it had happened to Vassilyev in the street to recognize a fallen woman as
      such, by her dress or her manners, or to see a picture of one in a comic
      paper, he always remembered a story he had once read: a young man, pure
      and self-sacrificing, loves a fallen woman and urges her to become his
      wife; she, considering herself unworthy of such happiness, takes poison.
    

      Vassilyev lived in one of the side streets turning out of Tverskoy
      Boulevard. When he came out of the house with his two friends it was about
      eleven o’clock. The first snow had not long fallen, and all nature
      was under the spell of the fresh snow. There was the smell of snow in the
      air, the snow crunched softly under the feet; the earth, the roofs, the
      trees, the seats on the boulevard, everything was soft, white, young, and
      this made the houses look quite different from the day before; the street
      lamps burned more brightly, the air was more transparent, the carriages
      rumbled with a deeper note, and with the fresh, light, frosty air a
      feeling stirred in the soul akin to the white, youthful, feathery snow.
      “Against my will an unknown force,” hummed the medical student
      in his agreeable tenor, “has led me to these mournful shores.”
    

      “Behold the mill...” the artist seconded him, “in ruins
      now....”
    

      “Behold the mill... in ruins now,” the medical student
      repeated, raising his eyebrows and shaking his head mournfully.
    

      He paused, rubbed his forehead, trying to remember the words, and then
      sang aloud, so well that passers-by looked round:
    

“Here in old days when I was free,
Love, free, unfettered, greeted me.”


      The three of them went into a restaurant and, without taking off their
      greatcoats, drank a couple of glasses of vodka each. Before drinking the
      second glass, Vassilyev noticed a bit of cork in his vodka, raised the
      glass to his eyes, and gazed into it for a long time, screwing up his
      shortsighted eyes. The medical student did not understand his expression,
      and said:
    

      “Come, why look at it? No philosophizing, please. Vodka is given us
      to be drunk, sturgeon to be eaten, women to be visited, snow to be walked
      upon. For one evening anyway live like a human being!”
    

      “But I haven’t said anything...” said Vassilyev,
      laughing. “Am I refusing to?”
    

      There was a warmth inside him from the vodka. He looked with softened
      feelings at his friends, admired them and envied them. In these strong,
      healthy, cheerful people how wonderfully balanced everything is, how
      finished and smooth is everything in their minds and souls! They sing, and
      have a passion for the theatre, and draw, and talk a great deal, and
      drink, and they don’t have headaches the day after; they are both
      poetical and debauched, both soft and hard; they can work, too, and be
      indignant, and laugh without reason, and talk nonsense; they are warm,
      honest, self-sacrificing, and as men are in no way inferior to himself,
      Vassilyev, who watched over every step he took and every word he uttered,
      who was fastidious and cautious, and ready to raise every trifle to the
      level of a problem. And he longed for one evening to live as his friends
      did, to open out, to let himself loose from his own control. If vodka had
      to be drunk, he would drink it, though his head would be splitting next
      morning. If he were taken to the women he would go. He would laugh, play
      the fool, gaily respond to the passing advances of strangers in the
      street....
    

      He went out of the restaurant laughing. He liked his friends—one in
      a crushed broad-brimmed hat, with an affectation of artistic untidiness;
      the other in a sealskin cap, a man not poor, though he affected to belong
      to the Bohemia of learning. He liked the snow, the pale street lamps, the
      sharp black tracks left in the first snow by the feet of the passers-by.
      He liked the air, and especially that limpid, tender, naive, as it were
      virginal tone, which can be seen in nature only twice in the year—when
      everything is covered with snow, and in spring on bright days and
      moonlight evenings when the ice breaks on the river.
    

“Against my will an unknown force,
Has led me to these mournful shores,”


      he hummed in an undertone.
    

      And the tune for some reason haunted him and his friends all the way, and
      all three of them hummed it mechanically, not in time with one another.
    

      Vassilyev’s imagination was picturing how, in another ten minutes,
      he and his friends would knock at a door; how by little dark passages and
      dark rooms they would steal in to the women; how, taking advantage of the
      darkness, he would strike a match, would light up and see the face of a
      martyr and a guilty smile. The unknown, fair or dark, would certainly have
      her hair down and be wearing a white dressing-jacket; she would be
      panic-stricken by the light, would be fearfully confused, and would say:
      “For God’s sake, what are you doing! Put it out!” It
      would all be dreadful, but interesting and new.
    

      The friends turned out of Trubnoy Square into Gratchevka, and soon reached
      the side street which Vassilyev only knew by reputation. Seeing two rows
      of houses with brightly lighted windows and wide-open doors, and hearing
      gay strains of pianos and violins, sounds which floated out from every
      door and mingled in a strange chaos, as though an unseen orchestra were
      tuning up in the darkness above the roofs, Vassilyev was surprised and
      said:
    

      “What a lot of houses!”
    

      “That’s nothing,” said the medical student. “In
      London there are ten times as many. There are about a hundred thousand
      such women there.”
    

      The cabmen were sitting on their boxes as calmly and indifferently as in
      any other side street; the same passers-by were walking along the pavement
      as in other streets. No one was hurrying, no one was hiding his face in
      his coat-collar, no one shook his head reproachfully.... And in this
      indifference to the noisy chaos of pianos and violins, to the bright
      windows and wide-open doors, there was a feeling of something very open,
      insolent, reckless, and devil-may-care. Probably it was as gay and noisy
      at the slave-markets in their day, and people’s faces and movements
      showed the same indifference.
    

      “Let us begin from the beginning,” said the artist.
    

      The friends went into a narrow passage lighted by a lamp with a reflector.
      When they opened the door a man in a black coat, with an unshaven face
      like a flunkey’s, and sleepy-looking eyes, got up lazily from a
      yellow sofa in the hall. The place smelt like a laundry with an odor of
      vinegar in addition. A door from the hall led into a brightly lighted
      room. The medical student and the artist stopped at this door and, craning
      their necks, peeped into the room.
    

      “Buona sera, signori, rigolleto—hugenotti—traviata!”
      began the artist, with a theatrical bow.
    

      “Havanna—tarakano—pistoleto!” said the medical
      student, pressing his cap to his breast and bowing low.
    

      Vassilyev was standing behind them. He would have liked to make a
      theatrical bow and say something silly, too, but he only smiled, felt an
      awkwardness that was like shame, and waited impatiently for what would
      happen next.
    

      A little fair girl of seventeen or eighteen, with short hair, in a short
      light-blue frock with a bunch of white ribbon on her bosom, appeared in
      the doorway.
    

      “Why do you stand at the door?” she said. “Take off your
      coats and come into the drawing-room.”
    

      The medical student and the artist, still talking Italian, went into the
      drawing-room. Vassilyev followed them irresolutely.
    

      “Gentlemen, take off your coats!” the flunkey said sternly;
      “you can’t go in like that.”
    

      In the drawing-room there was, besides the girl, another woman, very stout
      and tall, with a foreign face and bare arms. She was sitting near the
      piano, laying out a game of patience on her lap. She took no notice
      whatever of the visitors.
    

      “Where are the other young ladies?” asked the medical student.
    

      “They are having their tea,” said the fair girl. “Stepan,”
      she called, “go and tell the young ladies some students have come!”
    

      A little later a third young lady came into the room. She was wearing a
      bright red dress with blue stripes. Her face was painted thickly and
      unskillfully, her brow was hidden under her hair, and there was an
      unbHlinking, frightened stare in her eyes. As she came in, she began at
      once singing some song in a coarse, powerful contralto. After her a fourth
      appeared, and after her a fifth....
    

      In all this Vassilyev saw nothing new or interesting. It seemed to him
      that that room, the piano, the looking-glass in its cheap gilt frame, the
      bunch of white ribbon, the dress with the blue stripes, and the blank
      indifferent faces, he had seen before and more than once. Of the darkness,
      the silence, the secrecy, the guilty smile, of all that he had expected to
      meet here and had dreaded, he saw no trace.
    

      Everything was ordinary, prosaic, and uninteresting. Only one thing
      faintly stirred his curiosity—the terrible, as it were intentionally
      designed, bad taste which was visible in the cornices, in the absurd
      pictures, in the dresses, in the bunch of ribbons. There was something
      characteristic and peculiar in this bad taste.
    

      “How poor and stupid it all is!” thought Vassilyev. “What
      is there in all this trumpery I see now that can tempt a normal man and
      excite him to commit the horrible sin of buying a human being for a
      rouble? I understand any sin for the sake of splendor, beauty, grace,
      passion, taste; but what is there here? What is there here worth sinning
      for? But... one mustn’t think!”
    

      “Beardy, treat me to some porter!” said the fair girl,
      addressing him.
    

      Vassilyev was at once overcome with confusion.
    

      “With pleasure,” he said, bowing politely. “Only excuse
      me, madam, I.... I won’t drink with you. I don’t drink.”
    

      Five minutes later the friends went off into another house.
    

      “Why did you ask for porter?” said the medical student
      angrily. “What a millionaire! You have thrown away six roubles for
      no reason whatever—simply waste!”
    

      “If she wants it, why not let her have the pleasure?” said
      Vassilyev, justifying himself.
    

      “You did not give pleasure to her, but to the ‘Madam.’
      They are told to ask the visitors to stand them treat because it is a
      profit to the keeper.”
    

      “Behold the mill...” hummed the artist, “in ruins
      now....”
    

      Going into the next house, the friends stopped in the hall and did not go
      into the drawing-room. Here, as in the first house, a figure in a black
      coat, with a sleepy face like a flunkey’s, got up from a sofa in the
      hall. Looking at this flunkey, at his face and his shabby black coat,
      Vassilyev thought: “What must an ordinary simple Russian have gone
      through before fate flung him down as a flunkey here? Where had he been
      before and what had he done? What was awaiting him? Was he married? Where
      was his mother, and did she know that he was a servant here?” And
      Vassilyev could not help particularly noticing the flunkey in each house.
      In one of the houses—he thought it was the fourth—there was a
      little spare, frail-looking flunkey with a watch-chain on his waistcoat.
      He was reading a newspaper, and took no notice of them when they went in.
      Looking at his face Vassilyev, for some reason, thought that a man with
      such a face might steal, might murder, might bear false witness. But the
      face was really interesting: a big forehead, gray eyes, a little flattened
      nose, thin compressed lips, and a blankly stupid and at the same time
      insolent expression like that of a young harrier overtaking a hare.
      Vassilyev thought it would be nice to touch this man’s hair, to see
      whether it was soft or coarse. It must be coarse like a dog’s.
    

      III
    

      Having drunk two glasses of porter, the artist became suddenly tipsy and
      grew unnaturally lively.
    

      “Let’s go to another!” he said peremptorily, waving his
      hands. “I will take you to the best one.”
    

      When he had brought his friends to the house which in his opinion was the
      best, he declared his firm intention of dancing a quadrille. The medical
      student grumbled something about their having to pay the musicians a
      rouble, but agreed to be his vis-a-vis. They began dancing.
    

      It was just as nasty in the best house as in the worst. Here there were
      just the same looking-glasses and pictures, the same styles of coiffure
      and dress. Looking round at the furnishing of the rooms and the costumes,
      Vassilyev realized that this was not lack of taste, but something that
      might be called the taste, and even the style, of S. Street, which could
      not be found elsewhere—something intentional in its ugliness, not
      accidental, but elaborated in the course of years. After he had been in
      eight houses he was no longer surprised at the color of the dresses, at
      the long trains, the gaudy ribbons, the sailor dresses, and the thick
      purplish rouge on the cheeks; he saw that it all had to be like this, that
      if a single one of the women had been dressed like a human being, or if
      there had been one decent engraving on the wall, the general tone of the
      whole street would have suffered.
    

      “How unskillfully they sell themselves!” he thought. “How
      can they fail to understand that vice is only alluring when it is
      beautiful and hidden, when it wears the mask of virtue? Modest black
      dresses, pale faces, mournful smiles, and darkness would be far more
      effective than this clumsy tawdriness. Stupid things! If they don’t
      understand it of themselves, their visitors might surely have taught
      them....”
    

      A young lady in a Polish dress edged with white fur came up to him and sat
      down beside him.
    

      “You nice dark man, why aren’t you dancing?” she asked.
      “Why are you so dull?”
    

      “Because it is dull.”
    

      “Treat me to some Lafitte. Then it won’t be dull.”
    

      Vassilyev made no answer. He was silent for a little, and then asked:
    

      “What time do you get to sleep?”
    

      “At six o’clock.”
    

      “And what time do you get up?”
    

      “Sometimes at two and sometimes at three.”
    

      “And what do you do when you get up?”
    

      “We have coffee, and at six o’clock we have dinner.”
    

      “And what do you have for dinner?”
    

      “Usually soup, beefsteak, and dessert. Our madam keeps the girls
      well. But why do you ask all this?”
    

      “Oh, just to talk....”
    

      Vassilyev longed to talk to the young lady about many things. He felt an
      intense desire to find out where she came from, whether her parents were
      living, and whether they knew that she was here; how she had come into
      this house; whether she were cheerful and satisfied, or sad and oppressed
      by gloomy thoughts; whether she hoped some day to get out of her present
      position.... But he could not think how to begin or in what shape to put
      his questions so as not to seem impertinent. He thought for a long time,
      and asked:
    

      “How old are you?”
    

      “Eighty,” the young lady jested, looking with a laugh at the
      antics of the artist as he danced.
    

      All at once she burst out laughing at something, and uttered a long
      cynical sentence loud enough to be heard by everyone. Vassilyev was
      aghast, and not knowing how to look, gave a constrained smile. He was the
      only one who smiled; all the others, his friends, the musicians, the
      women, did not even glance towards his neighbor, but seemed not to have
      heard her.
    

      “Stand me some Lafitte,” his neighbor said again.
    

      Vassilyev felt a repulsion for her white fur and for her voice, and walked
      away from her. It seemed to him hot and stifling, and his heart began
      throbbing slowly but violently, like a hammer—one! two! three!
    

      “Let us go away!” he said, pulling the artist by his sleeve.
    

      “Wait a little; let me finish.”
    

      While the artist and the medical student were finishing the quadrille, to
      avoid looking at the women, Vassilyev scrutinized the musicians. A
      respectable-looking old man in spectacles, rather like Marshal Bazaine,
      was playing the piano; a young man with a fair beard, dressed in the
      latest fashion, was playing the violin. The young man had a face that did
      not look stupid nor exhausted, but intelligent, youthful, and fresh. He
      was dressed fancifully and with taste; he played with feeling. It was a
      mystery how he and the respectable-looking old man had come here. How was
      it they were not ashamed to sit here? What were they thinking about when
      they looked at the women?
    

      If the violin and the piano had been played by men in rags, looking
      hungry, gloomy, drunken, with dissipated or stupid faces, then one could
      have understood their presence, perhaps. As it was, Vassilyev could not
      understand it at all. He recalled the story of the fallen woman he had
      once read, and he thought now that that human figure with the guilty smile
      had nothing in common with what he was seeing now. It seemed to him that
      he was seeing not fallen women, but some different world quite apart,
      alien to him and incomprehensible; if he had seen this world before on the
      stage, or read of it in a book, he would not have believed in it....
    

      The woman with the white fur burst out laughing again and uttered a
      loathsome sentence in a loud voice. A feeling of disgust took possession
      of him. He flushed crimson and went out of the room.
    

      “Wait a minute, we are coming too!” the artist shouted to him.
    

      IV
    

      “While we were dancing,” said the medical student, as they all
      three went out into the street, “I had a conversation with my
      partner. We talked about her first romance. He, the hero, was an
      accountant at Smolensk with a wife and five children. She was seventeen,
      and she lived with her papa and mamma, who sold soap and candles.”
    

      “How did he win her heart?” asked Vassilyev.
    

      “By spending fifty roubles on underclothes for her. What next!”
    

      “So he knew how to get his partner’s story out of her,”
      thought Vassilyev about the medical student. “But I don’t know
      how to.”
    

      “I say, I am going home!” he said.
    

      “What for?”
    

      “Because I don’t know how to behave here. Besides, I am bored,
      disgusted. What is there amusing in it? If they were human beings—but
      they are savages and animals. I am going; do as you like.”
    

      “Come, Grisha, Grigory, darling...” said the artist in a
      tearful voice, hugging Vassilyev, “come along! Let’s go to one
      more together and damnation take them!... Please do, Grisha!”
    

      They persuaded Vassilyev and led him up a staircase. In the carpet and the
      gilt banisters, in the porter who opened the door, and in the panels that
      decorated the hall, the same S. Street style was apparent, but carried to
      a greater perfection, more imposing.
    

      “I really will go home!” said Vassilyev as he was taking off
      his coat.
    

      “Come, come, dear boy,” said the artist, and he kissed him on
      the neck. “Don’t be tiresome.... Gri-gri, be a good comrade!
      We came together, we will go back together. What a beast you are, really!”
    

      “I can wait for you in the street. I think it’s loathsome,
      really!”
    

      “Come, come, Grisha.... If it is loathsome, you can observe it! Do
      you understand? You can observe!”
    

      “One must take an objective view of things,” said the medical
      student gravely.
    

      Vassilyev went into the drawing-room and sat down. There were a number of
      visitors in the room besides him and his friends: two infantry officers, a
      bald, gray-haired gentleman in spectacles, two beardless youths from the
      institute of land-surveying, and a very tipsy man who looked like an
      actor. All the young ladies were taken up with these visitors and paid no
      attention to Vassilyev.
    

      Only one of them, dressed a la Aida, glanced sideways at him,
      smiled, and said, yawning: “A dark one has come....”
    

      Vassilyev’s heart was throbbing and his face burned. He felt ashamed
      before these visitors of his presence here, and he felt disgusted and
      miserable. He was tormented by the thought that he, a decent and loving
      man (such as he had hitherto considered himself), hated these women and
      felt nothing but repulsion towards them. He felt pity neither for the
      women nor the musicians nor the flunkeys.
    

      “It is because I am not trying to understand them,” he
      thought. “They are all more like animals than human beings, but of
      course they are human beings all the same, they have souls. One must
      understand them and then judge....”
    

      “Grisha, don’t go, wait for us,” the artist shouted to
      him and disappeared.
    

      The medical student disappeared soon after.
    

      “Yes, one must make an effort to understand, one mustn’t be
      like this....” Vassilyev went on thinking.
    

      And he began gazing at each of the women with strained attention, looking
      for a guilty smile. But either he did not know how to read their faces, or
      not one of these women felt herself to be guilty; he read on every face
      nothing but a blank expression of everyday vulgar boredom and complacency.
      Stupid faces, stupid smiles, harsh, stupid voices, insolent movements, and
      nothing else. Apparently each of them had in the past a romance with an
      accountant based on underclothes for fifty roubles, and looked for no
      other charm in the present but coffee, a dinner of three courses, wines,
      quadrilles, sleeping till two in the afternoon....
    

      Finding no guilty smile, Vassilyev began to look whether there was not one
      intelligent face. And his attention was caught by one pale, rather sleepy,
      exhausted-looking face.... It was a dark woman, not very young, wearing a
      dress covered with spangles; she was sitting in an easy-chair, looking at
      the floor lost in thought. Vassilyev walked from one corner of the room to
      the other, and, as though casually, sat down beside her.
    

      “I must begin with something trivial,” he thought, “and
      pass to what is serious....”
    

      “What a pretty dress you have,” and with his finger he touched
      the gold fringe of her fichu.
    

      “Oh, is it?...” said the dark woman listlessly.
    

      “What province do you come from?”
    

      “I? From a distance.... From Tchernigov.”
    

      “A fine province. It’s nice there.”
    

      “Any place seems nice when one is not in it.”
    

      “It’s a pity I cannot describe nature,” thought
      Vassilyev. “I might touch her by a description of nature in
      Tchernigov. No doubt she loves the place if she has been born there.”
    

      “Are you dull here?” he asked.
    

      “Of course I am dull.”
    

      “Why don’t you go away from here if you are dull?”
    

      “Where should I go to? Go begging or what?”
    

      “Begging would be easier than living here.”
    

      “How do you know that? Have you begged?”
    

      “Yes, when I hadn’t the money to study. Even if I hadn’t
      anyone could understand that. A beggar is anyway a free man, and you are a
      slave.”
    

      The dark woman stretched, and watched with sleepy eyes the footman who was
      bringing a trayful of glasses and seltzer water.
    

      “Stand me a glass of porter,” she said, and yawned again.
    

      “Porter,” thought Vassilyev. “And what if your brother
      or mother walked in at this moment? What would you say? And what would
      they say? There would be porter then, I imagine....”
    

      All at once there was the sound of weeping. From the adjoining room, from
      which the footman had brought the seltzer water, a fair man with a red
      face and angry eyes ran in quickly. He was followed by the tall, stout
      “madam,” who was shouting in a shrill voice:
    

      “Nobody has given you leave to slap girls on the cheeks! We have
      visitors better than you, and they don’t fight! Impostor!”
    

      A hubbub arose. Vassilyev was frightened and turned pale. In the next room
      there was the sound of bitter, genuine weeping, as though of someone
      insulted. And he realized that there were real people living here who,
      like people everywhere else, felt insulted, suffered, wept, and cried for
      help. The feeling of oppressive hate and disgust gave way to an acute
      feeling of pity and anger against the aggressor. He rushed into the room
      where there was weeping. Across rows of bottles on a marble-top table he
      distinguished a suffering face, wet with tears, stretched out his hands
      towards that face, took a step towards the table, but at once drew back in
      horror. The weeping girl was drunk.
    

      As he made his way though the noisy crowd gathered about the fair man, his
      heart sank and he felt frightened like a child; and it seemed to him that
      in this alien, incomprehensible world people wanted to pursue him, to beat
      him, to pelt him with filthy words.... He tore down his coat from the
      hatstand and ran headlong downstairs.
    

      V
    

      Leaning against the fence, he stood near the house waiting for his friends
      to come out. The sounds of the pianos and violins, gay, reckless,
      insolent, and mournful, mingled in the air in a sort of chaos, and this
      tangle of sounds seemed again like an unseen orchestra tuning up on the
      roofs. If one looked upwards into the darkness, the black background was
      all spangled with white, moving spots: it was snow falling. As the
      snowflakes came into the light they floated round lazily in the air like
      down, and still more lazily fell to the ground. The snowflakes whirled
      thickly round Vassilyev and hung upon his beard, his eyelashes, his
      eyebrows.... The cabmen, the horses, and the passers-by were white.
    

      “And how can the snow fall in this street!” thought Vassilyev.
      “Damnation take these houses!”
    

      His legs seemed to be giving way from fatigue, simply from having run down
      the stairs; he gasped for breath as though he had been climbing uphill,
      his heart beat so loudly that he could hear it. He was consumed by a
      desire to get out of the street as quickly as possible and to go home, but
      even stronger was his desire to wait for his companions and vent upon them
      his oppressive feeling.
    

      There was much he did not understand in these houses, the souls of ruined
      women were a mystery to him as before; but it was clear to him that the
      thing was far worse than could have been believed. If that sinful woman
      who had poisoned herself was called fallen, it was difficult to find a
      fitting name for all these who were dancing now to this tangle of sound
      and uttering long, loathsome sentences. They were not on the road to ruin,
      but ruined.
    

      “There is vice,” he thought, “but neither consciousness
      of sin nor hope of salvation. They are sold and bought, steeped in wine
      and abominations, while they, like sheep, are stupid, indifferent, and don’t
      understand. My God! My God!”
    

      It was clear to him, too, that everything that is called human dignity,
      personal rights, the Divine image and semblance, were defiled to their
      very foundations—“to the very marrow,” as drunkards say—and
      that not only the street and the stupid women were responsible for it.
    

      A group of students, white with snow, passed him laughing and talking
      gaily; one, a tall thin fellow, stopped, glanced into Vassilyev’s
      face, and said in a drunken voice:
    

      “One of us! A bit on, old man? Aha-ha! Never mind, have a good time!
      Don’t be down-hearted, old chap!”
    

      He took Vassilyev by the shoulder and pressed his cold wet mustache
      against his cheek, then he slipped, staggered, and, waving both hands,
      cried:
    

      “Hold on! Don’t upset!”
    

      And laughing, he ran to overtake his companions.
    

      Through the noise came the sound of the artist’s voice:
    

      “Don’t you dare to hit the women! I won’t let you,
      damnation take you! You scoundrels!”
    

      The medical student appeared in the doorway. He looked from side to side,
      and seeing Vassilyev, said in an agitated voice:
    

      “You here! I tell you it’s really impossible to go anywhere
      with Yegor! What a fellow he is! I don’t understand him! He has got
      up a scene! Do you hear? Yegor!” he shouted at the door. “Yegor!”
    

      “I won’t allow you to hit women!” the artist’s
      piercing voice sounded from above. Something heavy and lumbering rolled
      down the stairs. It was the artist falling headlong. Evidently he had been
      pushed downstairs.
    

      He picked himself up from the ground, shook his hat, and, with an angry
      and indignant face, brandished his fist towards the top of the stairs and
      shouted:
    

      “Scoundrels! Torturers! Bloodsuckers! I won’t allow you to hit
      them! To hit a weak, drunken woman! Oh, you brutes!...”
    

      “Yegor!... Come, Yegor!...” the medical student began
      imploring him. “I give you my word of honor I’ll never come
      with you again. On my word of honor I won’t!”
    

      Little by little the artist was pacified and the friends went homewards.
    

      “Against my will an unknown force,” hummed the medical
      student, “has led me to these mournful shores.”
    

      “Behold the mill,” the artist chimed in a little later,
      “in ruins now. What a lot of snow, Holy Mother! Grisha, why did you
      go? You are a funk, a regular old woman.”
    

      Vassilyev walked behind his companions, looked at their backs, and
      thought:
    

      “One of two things: either we only fancy prostitution is an evil,
      and we exaggerate it; or, if prostitution really is as great an evil as is
      generally assumed, these dear friends of mine are as much slaveowners,
      violators, and murderers, as the inhabitants of Syria and Cairo, that are
      described in the ‘Neva.’ Now they are singing, laughing,
      talking sense, but haven’t they just been exploiting hunger,
      ignorance, and stupidity? They have—I have been a witness of it.
      What is the use of their humanity, their medicine, their painting? The
      science, art, and lofty sentiments of these soul-destroyers remind me of
      the piece of bacon in the story. Two brigands murdered a beggar in a
      forest; they began sharing his clothes between them, and found in his
      wallet a piece of bacon. ‘Well found,’ said one of them,
      ‘let us have a bit.’ ‘What do you mean? How can you?’
      cried the other in horror. ‘Have you forgotten that to-day is
      Wednesday?’ And they would not eat it. After murdering a man, they
      came out of the forest in the firm conviction that they were keeping the
      fast. In the same way these men, after buying women, go their way
      imagining that they are artists and men of science....”
    

      “Listen!” he said sharply and angrily. “Why do you come
      here? Is it possible—is it possible you don’t understand how
      horrible it is? Your medical books tell you that every one of these women
      dies prematurely of consumption or something; art tells you that morally
      they are dead even earlier. Every one of them dies because she has in her
      time to entertain five hundred men on an average, let us say. Each one of
      them is killed by five hundred men. You are among those five hundred! If
      each of you in the course of your lives visits this place or others like
      it two hundred and fifty times, it follows that one woman is killed for
      every two of you! Can’t you understand that? Isn’t it horrible
      to murder, two of you, three of you, five of you, a foolish, hungry woman!
      Ah! isn’t it awful, my God!”
    

      “I knew it would end like that,” the artist said frowning.
      “We ought not to have gone with this fool and ass! You imagine you
      have grand notions in your head now, ideas, don’t you? No, it’s
      the devil knows what, but not ideas. You are looking at me now with hatred
      and repulsion, but I tell you it’s better you should set up twenty
      more houses like those than look like that. There’s more vice in
      your expression than in the whole street! Come along, Volodya, let him go
      to the devil! He’s a fool and an ass, and that’s all....”
    

      “We human beings do murder each other,” said the medical
      student. “It’s immoral, of course, but philosophizing doesn’t
      help it. Good-by!”
    

      At Trubnoy Square the friends said good-by and parted. When he was left
      alone, Vassilyev strode rapidly along the boulevard. He felt frightened of
      the darkness, of the snow which was falling in heavy flakes on the ground,
      and seemed as though it would cover up the whole world; he felt frightened
      of the street lamps shining with pale light through the clouds of snow.
      His soul was possessed by an unaccountable, faint-hearted terror.
      Passers-by came towards him from time to time, but he timidly moved to one
      side; it seemed to him that women, none but women, were coming from all
      sides and staring at him....
    

      “It’s beginning,” he thought, “I am going to have
      a breakdown.”
    

      VI
    

      At home he lay on his bed and said, shuddering all over: “They are
      alive! Alive! My God, those women are alive!”
    

      He encouraged his imagination in all sorts of ways to picture himself the
      brother of a fallen woman, or her father; then a fallen woman herself,
      with her painted cheeks; and it all moved him to horror.
    

      It seemed to him that he must settle the question at once at all costs,
      and that this question was not one that did not concern him, but was his
      own personal problem. He made an immense effort, repressed his despair,
      and, sitting on the bed, holding his head in his hands, began thinking how
      one could save all the women he had seen that day. The method for
      attacking problems of all kinds was, as he was an educated man, well known
      to him. And, however excited he was, he strictly adhered to that method.
      He recalled the history of the problem and its literature, and for a
      quarter of an hour he paced from one end of the room to the other trying
      to remember all the methods practiced at the present time for saving
      women. He had very many good friends and acquaintances who lived in
      lodgings in Petersburg.... Among them were a good many honest and
      self-sacrificing men. Some of them had attempted to save women....
    

      “All these not very numerous attempts,” thought Vassilyev,
      “can be divided into three groups. Some, after buying the woman out
      of the brothel, took a room for her, bought her a sewing-machine, and she
      became a semptress. And whether he wanted to or not, after having bought
      her out he made her his mistress; then when he had taken his degree, he
      went away and handed her into the keeping of some other decent man as
      though she were a thing. And the fallen woman remained a fallen woman.
      Others, after buying her out, took a lodging apart for her, bought the
      inevitable sewing-machine, and tried teaching her to read, preaching at
      her and giving her books. The woman lived and sewed as long as it was
      interesting and a novelty to her, then getting bored, began receiving men
      on the sly, or ran away and went back where she could sleep till three o’clock,
      drink coffee, and have good dinners. The third class, the most ardent and
      self-sacrificing, had taken a bold, resolute step. They had married them.
      And when the insolent and spoilt, or stupid and crushed animal became a
      wife, the head of a household, and afterwards a mother, it turned her
      whole existence and attitude to life upside down, so that it was hard to
      recognize the fallen woman afterwards in the wife and the mother. Yes,
      marriage was the best and perhaps the only means.”
    

      “But it is impossible!” Vassilyev said aloud, and he sank upon
      his bed. “I, to begin with, could not marry one! To do that one must
      be a saint and be unable to feel hatred or repulsion. But supposing that
      I, the medical student, and the artist mastered ourselves and did marry
      them—suppose they were all married. What would be the result? The
      result would be that while here in Moscow they were being married, some
      Smolensk accountant would be debauching another lot, and that lot would be
      streaming here to fill the vacant places, together with others from
      Saratov, Nizhni-Novgorod, Warsaw.... And what is one to do with the
      hundred thousand in London? What’s one to do with those in Hamburg?”
    

      The lamp in which the oil had burnt down began to smoke. Vassilyev did not
      notice it. He began pacing to and fro again, still thinking. Now he put
      the question differently: what must be done that fallen women should not
      be needed? For that, it was essential that the men who buy them and do
      them to death should feel all the immorality of their share in enslaving
      them and should be horrified. One must save the men.
    

      “One won’t do anything by art and science, that is clear...”
      thought Vassilyev. “The only way out of it is missionary work.”
    

      And he began to dream how he would the next evening stand at the corner of
      the street and say to every passer-by: “Where are you going and what
      for? Have some fear of God!”
    

      He would turn to the apathetic cabmen and say to them: “Why are you
      staying here? Why aren’t you revolted? Why aren’t you
      indignant? I suppose you believe in God and know that it is a sin, that
      people go to hell for it? Why don’t you speak? It is true that they
      are strangers to you, but you know even they have fathers, brothers like
      yourselves....”
    

      One of Vassilyev’s friends had once said of him that he was a
      talented man. There are all sorts of talents—talent for writing,
      talent for the stage, talent for art; but he had a peculiar talent—a
      talent for humanity. He possessed an extraordinarily fine delicate
      scent for pain in general. As a good actor reflects in himself the
      movements and voice of others, so Vassilyev could reflect in his soul the
      sufferings of others. When he saw tears, he wept; beside a sick man, he
      felt sick himself and moaned; if he saw an act of violence, he felt as
      though he himself were the victim of it, he was frightened as a child, and
      in his fright ran to help. The pain of others worked on his nerves,
      excited him, roused him to a state of frenzy, and so on.
    

      Whether this friend were right I don’t know, but what Vassilyev
      experienced when he thought this question was settled was something like
      inspiration. He cried and laughed, spoke aloud the words that he should
      say next day, felt a fervent love for those who would listen to him and
      would stand beside him at the corner of the street to preach; he sat down
      to write letters, made vows to himself....
    

      All this was like inspiration also from the fact that it did not last
      long. Vassilyev was soon tired. The cases in London, in Hamburg, in
      Warsaw, weighed upon him by their mass as a mountain weighs upon the
      earth; he felt dispirited, bewildered, in the face of this mass; he
      remembered that he had not a gift for words, that he was cowardly and
      timid, that indifferent people would not be willing to listen and
      understand him, a law student in his third year, a timid and insignificant
      person; that genuine missionary work included not only teaching but
      deeds...
    

      When it was daylight and carriages were already beginning to rumble in the
      street, Vassilyev was lying motionless on the sofa, staring into space. He
      was no longer thinking of the women, nor of the men, nor of missionary
      work. His whole attention was turned upon the spiritual agony which was
      torturing him. It was a dull, vague, undefined anguish akin to misery, to
      an extreme form of terror and to despair. He could point to the place
      where the pain was, in his breast under his heart; but he could not
      compare it with anything. In the past he had had acute toothache, he had
      had pleurisy and neuralgia, but all that was insignificant compared with
      this spiritual anguish. In the presence of that pain life seemed
      loathsome. The dissertation, the excellent work he had written already,
      the people he loved, the salvation of fallen women—everything that
      only the day before he had cared about or been indifferent to, now when he
      thought of them irritated him in the same way as the noise of the
      carriages, the scurrying footsteps of the waiters in the passage, the
      daylight.... If at that moment someone had performed a great deed of mercy
      or had committed a revolting outrage, he would have felt the same
      repulsion for both actions. Of all the thoughts that strayed through his
      mind only two did not irritate him: one was that at every moment he had
      the power to kill himself, the other that this agony would not last more
      than three days. This last he knew by experience.
    

      After lying for a while he got up and, wringing his hands, walked about
      the room, not as usual from corner to corner, but round the room beside
      the walls. As he passed he glanced at himself in the looking-glass. His
      face looked pale and sunken, his temples looked hollow, his eyes were
      bigger, darker, more staring, as though they belonged to someone else, and
      they had an expression of insufferable mental agony.
    

      At midday the artist knocked at the door.
    

      “Grigory, are you at home?” he asked.
    

      Getting no answer, he stood for a minute, pondered, and answered himself
      in Little Russian: “Nay. The confounded fellow has gone to the
      University.”
    

      And he went away. Vassilyev lay down on the bed and, thrusting his head
      under the pillow, began crying with agony, and the more freely his tears
      flowed the more terrible his mental anguish became. As it began to get
      dark, he thought of the agonizing night awaiting him, and was overcome by
      a horrible despair. He dressed quickly, ran out of his room, and, leaving
      his door wide open, for no object or reason, went out into the street.
      Without asking himself where he should go, he walked quickly along Sadovoy
      Street.
    

      Snow was falling as heavily as the day before; it was thawing. Thrusting
      his hands into his sleeves, shuddering and frightened at the noises, at
      the trambells, and at the passers-by, Vassilyev walked along Sadovoy
      Street as far as Suharev Tower; then to the Red Gate; from there he turned
      off to Basmannya Street. He went into a tavern and drank off a big glass
      of vodka, but that did not make him feel better. When he reached Razgulya
      he turned to the right, and strode along side streets in which he had
      never been before in his life. He reached the old bridge by which the
      Yauza runs gurgling, and from which one can see long rows of lights in the
      windows of the Red Barracks. To distract his spiritual anguish by some new
      sensation or some other pain, Vassilyev, not knowing what to do, crying
      and shuddering, undid his greatcoat and jacket and exposed his bare chest
      to the wet snow and the wind. But that did not lessen his suffering
      either. Then he bent down over the rail of the bridge and looked down into
      the black, yeasty Yauza, and he longed to plunge down head foremost; not
      from loathing for life, not for the sake of suicide, but in order to
      bruise himself at least, and by one pain to ease the other. But the black
      water, the darkness, the deserted banks covered with snow were terrifying.
      He shivered and walked on. He walked up and down by the Red Barracks, then
      turned back and went down to a copse, from the copse back to the bridge
      again.
    

      “No, home, home!” he thought. “At home I believe it’s
      better...”
    

      And he went back. When he reached home he pulled off his wet coat and cap,
      began pacing round the room, and went on pacing round and round without
      stopping till morning.
    

      VII
    

      When next morning the artist and the medical student went in to him, he
      was moving about the room with his shirt torn, biting his hands and
      moaning with pain.
    

      “For God’s sake!” he sobbed when he saw his friends,
      “take me where you please, do what you can; but for God’s
      sake, save me quickly! I shall kill myself!”
    

      The artist turned pale and was helpless. The medical student, too, almost
      shed tears, but considering that doctors ought to be cool and composed in
      every emergency said coldly:
    

      “It’s a nervous breakdown. But it’s nothing. Let us go
      at once to the doctor.”
    

      “Wherever you like, only for God’s sake, make haste!”
    

      “Don’t excite yourself. You must try and control yourself.”
    

      The artist and the medical student with trembling hands put Vassilyev’s
      coat and hat on and led him out into the street.
    

      “Mihail Sergeyitch has been wanting to make your acquaintance for a
      long time,” the medical student said on the way. “He is a very
      nice man and thoroughly good at his work. He took his degree in 1882, and
      he has an immense practice already. He treats students as though he were
      one himself.”
    

      “Make haste, make haste!...” Vassilyev urged.
    

      Mihail Sergeyitch, a stout, fair-haired doctor, received the friends with
      politeness and frigid dignity, and smiled only on one side of his face.
    

      “Rybnikov and Mayer have spoken to me of your illness already,”
      he said. “Very glad to be of service to you. Well? Sit down, I
      beg....”
    

      He made Vassilyev sit down in a big armchair near the table, and moved a
      box of cigarettes towards him.
    

      “Now then!” he began, stroking his knees. “Let us get to
      work.... How old are you?”
    

      He asked questions and the medical student answered them. He asked whether
      Vassilyev’s father had suffered from certain special diseases,
      whether he drank to excess, whether he were remarkable for cruelty or any
      peculiarities. He made similar inquiries about his grandfather, mother,
      sisters, and brothers. On learning that his mother had a beautiful voice
      and sometimes acted on the stage, he grew more animated at once, and
      asked:
    

      “Excuse me, but don’t you remember, perhaps, your mother had a
      passion for the stage?”
    

      Twenty minutes passed. Vassilyev was annoyed by the way the doctor kept
      stroking his knees and talking of the same thing.
    

      “So far as I understand your questions, doctor,” he said,
      “you want to know whether my illness is hereditary or not. It is
      not.”
    

      The doctor proceeded to ask Vassilyev whether he had had any secret vices
      as a boy, or had received injuries to his head; whether he had had any
      aberrations, any peculiarities, or exceptional propensities. Half the
      questions usually asked by doctors of their patients can be left
      unanswered without the slightest ill effect on the health, but Mihail
      Sergeyitch, the medical student, and the artist all looked as though if
      Vassilyev failed to answer one question all would be lost. As he received
      answers, the doctor for some reason noted them down on a slip of paper. On
      learning that Vassilyev had taken his degree in natural science, and was
      now studying law, the doctor pondered.
    

      “He wrote a first-rate piece of original work last year,...”
      said the medical student.
    

      “I beg your pardon, but don’t interrupt me; you prevent me
      from concentrating,” said the doctor, and he smiled on one side of
      his face. “Though, of course, that does enter into the diagnosis.
      Intense intellectual work, nervous exhaustion.... Yes, yes.... And do you
      drink vodka?” he said, addressing Vassilyev.
    

      “Very rarely.”
    

      Another twenty minutes passed. The medical student began telling the
      doctor in a low voice his opinion as to the immediate cause of the attack,
      and described how the day before yesterday the artist, Vassilyev, and he
      had visited S. Street.
    

      The indifferent, reserved, and frigid tone in which his friends and the
      doctor spoke of the women and that miserable street struck Vassilyev as
      strange in the extreme....
    

      “Doctor, tell me one thing only,” he said, controlling himself
      so as not to speak rudely. “Is prostitution an evil or not?”
    

      “My dear fellow, who disputes it?” said the doctor, with an
      expression that suggested that he had settled all such questions for
      himself long ago. “Who disputes it?”
    

      “You are a mental doctor, aren’t you?” Vassilyev asked
      curtly.
    

      “Yes, a mental doctor.”
    

      “Perhaps all of you are right!” said Vassilyev, getting up and
      beginning to walk from one end of the room to the other. “Perhaps!
      But it all seems marvelous to me! That I should have taken my degree in
      two faculties you look upon as a great achievement; because I have written
      a work which in three years will be thrown aside and forgotten, I am
      praised up to the skies; but because I cannot speak of fallen women as
      unconcernedly as of these chairs, I am being examined by a doctor, I am
      called mad, I am pitied!”
    

      Vassilyev for some reason felt all at once unutterably sorry for himself,
      and his companions, and all the people he had seen two days before, and
      for the doctor; he burst into tears and sank into a chair.
    

      His friends looked inquiringly at the doctor. The latter, with the air of
      completely comprehending the tears and the despair, of feeling himself a
      specialist in that line, went up to Vassilyev and, without a word, gave
      him some medicine to drink; and then, when he was calmer, undressed him
      and began to investigate the degree of sensibility of the skin, the reflex
      action of the knees, and so on.
    

      And Vassilyev felt easier. When he came out from the doctor’s he was
      beginning to feel ashamed; the rattle of the carriages no longer irritated
      him, and the load at his heart grew lighter and lighter as though it were
      melting away. He had two prescriptions in his hand: one was for bromide,
      one was for morphia.... He had taken all these remedies before.
    

      In the street he stood still and, saying good-by to his friends, dragged
      himself languidly to the University.
    







      MISERY
    

      “To whom shall I tell my grief?”
    

      THE twilight of evening. Big flakes of wet snow are whirling lazily about
      the street lamps, which have just been lighted, and lying in a thin soft
      layer on roofs, horses’ backs, shoulders, caps. Iona Potapov, the
      sledge-driver, is all white like a ghost. He sits on the box without
      stirring, bent as double as the living body can be bent. If a regular
      snowdrift fell on him it seems as though even then he would not think it
      necessary to shake it off.... His little mare is white and motionless too.
      Her stillness, the angularity of her lines, and the stick-like
      straightness of her legs make her look like a halfpenny gingerbread horse.
      She is probably lost in thought. Anyone who has been torn away from the
      plough, from the familiar gray landscapes, and cast into this slough, full
      of monstrous lights, of unceasing uproar and hurrying people, is bound to
      think.
    

      It is a long time since Iona and his nag have budged. They came out of the
      yard before dinnertime and not a single fare yet. But now the shades of
      evening are falling on the town. The pale light of the street lamps
      changes to a vivid color, and the bustle of the street grows noisier.
    

      “Sledge to Vyborgskaya!” Iona hears. “Sledge!”
    

      Iona starts, and through his snow-plastered eyelashes sees an officer in a
      military overcoat with a hood over his head.
    

      “To Vyborgskaya,” repeats the officer. “Are you asleep?
      To Vyborgskaya!”
    

      In token of assent Iona gives a tug at the reins which sends cakes of snow
      flying from the horse’s back and shoulders. The officer gets into
      the sledge. The sledge-driver clicks to the horse, cranes his neck like a
      swan, rises in his seat, and more from habit than necessity brandishes his
      whip. The mare cranes her neck, too, crooks her stick-like legs, and
      hesitatingly sets of....
    

      “Where are you shoving, you devil?” Iona immediately hears
      shouts from the dark mass shifting to and fro before him. “Where the
      devil are you going? Keep to the r-right!”
    

      “You don’t know how to drive! Keep to the right,” says
      the officer angrily.
    

      A coachman driving a carriage swears at him; a pedestrian crossing the
      road and brushing the horse’s nose with his shoulder looks at him
      angrily and shakes the snow off his sleeve. Iona fidgets on the box as
      though he were sitting on thorns, jerks his elbows, and turns his eyes
      about like one possessed as though he did not know where he was or why he
      was there.
    

      “What rascals they all are!” says the officer jocosely.
      “They are simply doing their best to run up against you or fall
      under the horse’s feet. They must be doing it on purpose.”
    

      Iona looks as his fare and moves his lips.... Apparently he means to say
      something, but nothing comes but a sniff.
    

      “What?” inquires the officer.
    

      Iona gives a wry smile, and straining his throat, brings out huskily:
      “My son... er... my son died this week, sir.”
    

      “H’m! What did he die of?”
    

      Iona turns his whole body round to his fare, and says:
    

      “Who can tell! It must have been from fever.... He lay three days in
      the hospital and then he died.... God’s will.”
    

      “Turn round, you devil!” comes out of the darkness. “Have
      you gone cracked, you old dog? Look where you are going!”
    

      “Drive on! drive on!...” says the officer. “We shan’t
      get there till to-morrow going on like this. Hurry up!”
    

      The sledge-driver cranes his neck again, rises in his seat, and with heavy
      grace swings his whip. Several times he looks round at the officer, but
      the latter keeps his eyes shut and is apparently disinclined to listen.
      Putting his fare down at Vyborgskaya, Iona stops by a restaurant, and
      again sits huddled up on the box.... Again the wet snow paints him and his
      horse white. One hour passes, and then another....
    

      Three young men, two tall and thin, one short and hunchbacked, come up,
      railing at each other and loudly stamping on the pavement with their
      goloshes.
    

      “Cabby, to the Police Bridge!” the hunchback cries in a
      cracked voice. “The three of us,... twenty kopecks!”
    

      Iona tugs at the reins and clicks to his horse. Twenty kopecks is not a
      fair price, but he has no thoughts for that. Whether it is a rouble or
      whether it is five kopecks does not matter to him now so long as he has a
      fare.... The three young men, shoving each other and using bad language,
      go up to the sledge, and all three try to sit down at once. The question
      remains to be settled: Which are to sit down and which one is to stand?
      After a long altercation, ill-temper, and abuse, they come to the
      conclusion that the hunchback must stand because he is the shortest.
    

      “Well, drive on,” says the hunchback in his cracked voice,
      settling himself and breathing down Iona’s neck. “Cut along!
      What a cap you’ve got, my friend! You wouldn’t find a worse
      one in all Petersburg....”
    

      “He-he!... he-he!...” laughs Iona. “It’s nothing
      to boast of!”
    

      “Well, then, nothing to boast of, drive on! Are you going to drive
      like this all the way? Eh? Shall I give you one in the neck?”
    

      “My head aches,” says one of the tall ones. “At the
      Dukmasovs’ yesterday Vaska and I drank four bottles of brandy
      between us.”
    

      “I can’t make out why you talk such stuff,” says the
      other tall one angrily. “You lie like a brute.”
    

      “Strike me dead, it’s the truth!...”
    

      “It’s about as true as that a louse coughs.”
    

      “He-he!” grins Iona. “Me-er-ry gentlemen!”
    

      “Tfoo! the devil take you!” cries the hunchback indignantly.
      “Will you get on, you old plague, or won’t you? Is that the
      way to drive? Give her one with the whip. Hang it all, give it her well.”
    

      Iona feels behind his back the jolting person and quivering voice of the
      hunchback. He hears abuse addressed to him, he sees people, and the
      feeling of loneliness begins little by little to be less heavy on his
      heart. The hunchback swears at him, till he chokes over some elaborately
      whimsical string of epithets and is overpowered by his cough. His tall
      companions begin talking of a certain Nadyezhda Petrovna. Iona looks round
      at them. Waiting till there is a brief pause, he looks round once more and
      says:
    

      “This week... er... my... er... son died!”
    

      “We shall all die,...” says the hunchback with a sigh, wiping
      his lips after coughing. “Come, drive on! drive on! My friends, I
      simply cannot stand crawling like this! When will he get us there?”
    

      “Well, you give him a little encouragement... one in the neck!”
    

      “Do you hear, you old plague? I’ll make you smart. If one
      stands on ceremony with fellows like you one may as well walk. Do you
      hear, you old dragon? Or don’t you care a hang what we say?”
    

      And Iona hears rather than feels a slap on the back of his neck.
    

      “He-he!...” he laughs. “Merry gentlemen.... God give you
      health!”
    

      “Cabman, are you married?” asks one of the tall ones.
    

      “I? He he! Me-er-ry gentlemen. The only wife for me now is the damp
      earth.... He-ho-ho!.... The grave that is!... Here my son’s dead and
      I am alive.... It’s a strange thing, death has come in at the wrong
      door.... Instead of coming for me it went for my son....”
    

      And Iona turns round to tell them how his son died, but at that point the
      hunchback gives a faint sigh and announces that, thank God! they have
      arrived at last. After taking his twenty kopecks, Iona gazes for a long
      while after the revelers, who disappear into a dark entry. Again he is
      alone and again there is silence for him.... The misery which has been for
      a brief space eased comes back again and tears his heart more cruelly than
      ever. With a look of anxiety and suffering Iona’s eyes stray
      restlessly among the crowds moving to and fro on both sides of the street:
      can he not find among those thousands someone who will listen to him? But
      the crowds flit by heedless of him and his misery.... His misery is
      immense, beyond all bounds. If Iona’s heart were to burst and his
      misery to flow out, it would flood the whole world, it seems, but yet it
      is not seen. It has found a hiding-place in such an insignificant shell
      that one would not have found it with a candle by daylight....
    

      Iona sees a house-porter with a parcel and makes up his mind to address
      him.
    

      “What time will it be, friend?” he asks.
    

      “Going on for ten.... Why have you stopped here? Drive on!”
    

      Iona drives a few paces away, bends himself double, and gives himself up
      to his misery. He feels it is no good to appeal to people. But before five
      minutes have passed he draws himself up, shakes his head as though he
      feels a sharp pain, and tugs at the reins.... He can bear it no longer.
    

      “Back to the yard!” he thinks. “To the yard!”
    

      And his little mare, as though she knew his thoughts, falls to trotting.
      An hour and a half later Iona is sitting by a big dirty stove. On the
      stove, on the floor, and on the benches are people snoring. The air is
      full of smells and stuffiness. Iona looks at the sleeping figures,
      scratches himself, and regrets that he has come home so early....
    

      “I have not earned enough to pay for the oats, even,” he
      thinks. “That’s why I am so miserable. A man who knows how to
      do his work,... who has had enough to eat, and whose horse has had enough
      to eat, is always at ease....”
    

      In one of the corners a young cabman gets up, clears his throat sleepily,
      and makes for the water-bucket.
    

      “Want a drink?” Iona asks him.
    

      “Seems so.”
    

      “May it do you good.... But my son is dead, mate.... Do you hear?
      This week in the hospital.... It’s a queer business....”
    

      Iona looks to see the effect produced by his words, but he sees nothing.
      The young man has covered his head over and is already asleep. The old man
      sighs and scratches himself.... Just as the young man had been thirsty for
      water, he thirsts for speech. His son will soon have been dead a week, and
      he has not really talked to anybody yet.... He wants to talk of it
      properly, with deliberation.... He wants to tell how his son was taken
      ill, how he suffered, what he said before he died, how he died.... He
      wants to describe the funeral, and how he went to the hospital to get his
      son’s clothes. He still has his daughter Anisya in the country....
      And he wants to talk about her too.... Yes, he has plenty to talk about
      now. His listener ought to sigh and exclaim and lament.... It would be
      even better to talk to women. Though they are silly creatures, they
      blubber at the first word.
    

      “Let’s go out and have a look at the mare,” Iona thinks.
      “There is always time for sleep.... You’ll have sleep enough,
      no fear....”
    

      He puts on his coat and goes into the stables where his mare is standing.
      He thinks about oats, about hay, about the weather.... He cannot think
      about his son when he is alone.... To talk about him with someone is
      possible, but to think of him and picture him is insufferable anguish....
    

      “Are you munching?” Iona asks his mare, seeing her shining
      eyes. “There, munch away, munch away.... Since we have not earned
      enough for oats, we will eat hay.... Yes,... I have grown too old to
      drive.... My son ought to be driving, not I.... He was a real cabman....
      He ought to have lived....”
    

      Iona is silent for a while, and then he goes on:
    

      “That’s how it is, old girl.... Kuzma Ionitch is gone.... He
      said good-by to me.... He went and died for no reason.... Now, suppose you
      had a little colt, and you were own mother to that little colt. ... And
      all at once that same little colt went and died.... You’d be sorry,
      wouldn’t you?...”
    

      The little mare munches, listens, and breathes on her master’s
      hands. Iona is carried away and tells her all about it.
    







      CHAMPAGNE
    

      A WAYFARER’S STORY
    

      IN the year in which my story begins I had a job at a little station on
      one of our southwestern railways. Whether I had a gay or a dull life at
      the station you can judge from the fact that for fifteen miles round there
      was not one human habitation, not one woman, not one decent tavern; and in
      those days I was young, strong, hot-headed, giddy, and foolish. The only
      distraction I could possibly find was in the windows of the passenger
      trains, and in the vile vodka which the Jews drugged with thorn-apple.
      Sometimes there would be a glimpse of a woman’s head at a carriage
      window, and one would stand like a statue without breathing and stare at
      it until the train turned into an almost invisible speck; or one would
      drink all one could of the loathsome vodka till one was stupefied and did
      not feel the passing of the long hours and days. Upon me, a native of the
      north, the steppe produced the effect of a deserted Tatar cemetery. In the
      summer the steppe with its solemn calm, the monotonous chur of the
      grasshoppers, the transparent moonlight from which one could not hide,
      reduced me to listless melancholy; and in the winter the irreproachable
      whiteness of the steppe, its cold distance, long nights, and howling
      wolves oppressed me like a heavy nightmare. There were several people
      living at the station: my wife and I, a deaf and scrofulous telegraph
      clerk, and three watchmen. My assistant, a young man who was in
      consumption, used to go for treatment to the town, where he stayed for
      months at a time, leaving his duties to me together with the right of
      pocketing his salary. I had no children, no cake would have tempted
      visitors to come and see me, and I could only visit other officials on the
      line, and that no oftener than once a month.
    

      I remember my wife and I saw the New Year in. We sat at table, chewed
      lazily, and heard the deaf telegraph clerk monotonously tapping on his
      apparatus in the next room. I had already drunk five glasses of drugged
      vodka, and, propping my heavy head on my fist, thought of my overpowering
      boredom from which there was no escape, while my wife sat beside me and
      did not take her eyes off me. She looked at me as no one can look but a
      woman who has nothing in this world but a handsome husband. She loved me
      madly, slavishly, and not merely my good looks, or my soul, but my sins,
      my ill-humor and boredom, and even my cruelty when, in drunken fury, not
      knowing how to vent my ill-humor, I tormented her with reproaches.
    

      In spite of the boredom which was consuming me, we were preparing to see
      the New Year in with exceptional festiveness, and were awaiting midnight
      with some impatience. The fact is, we had in reserve two bottles of
      champagne, the real thing, with the label of Veuve Clicquot; this treasure
      I had won the previous autumn in a bet with the station-master of D. when
      I was drinking with him at a christening. It sometimes happens during a
      lesson in mathematics, when the very air is still with boredom, a
      butterfly flutters into the class-room; the boys toss their heads and
      begin watching its flight with interest, as though they saw before them
      not a butterfly but something new and strange; in the same way ordinary
      champagne, chancing to come into our dreary station, roused us. We sat in
      silence looking alternately at the clock and at the bottles.
    

      When the hands pointed to five minutes to twelve I slowly began uncorking
      a bottle. I don’t know whether I was affected by the vodka, or
      whether the bottle was wet, but all I remember is that when the cork flew
      up to the ceiling with a bang, my bottle slipped out of my hands and fell
      on the floor. Not more than a glass of the wine was spilt, as I managed to
      catch the bottle and put my thumb over the foaming neck.
    

      “Well, may the New Year bring you happiness!” I said, filling
      two glasses. “Drink!”
    

      My wife took her glass and fixed her frightened eyes on me. Her face was
      pale and wore a look of horror.
    

      “Did you drop the bottle?” she asked.
    

      “Yes. But what of that?”
    

      “It’s unlucky,” she said, putting down her glass and
      turning paler still. “It’s a bad omen. It means that some
      misfortune will happen to us this year.”
    

      “What a silly thing you are,” I sighed. “You are a
      clever woman, and yet you talk as much nonsense as an old nurse. Drink.”
    

      “God grant it is nonsense, but... something is sure to happen! You’ll
      see.”
    

      She did not even sip her glass, she moved away and sank into thought. I
      uttered a few stale commonplaces about superstition, drank half a bottle,
      paced up and down, and then went out of the room.
    

      Outside there was the still frosty night in all its cold, inhospitable
      beauty. The moon and two white fluffy clouds beside it hung just over the
      station, motionless as though glued to the spot, and looked as though
      waiting for something. A faint transparent light came from them and
      touched the white earth softly, as though afraid of wounding her modesty,
      and lighted up everything—the snowdrifts, the embankment.... It was
      still.
    

      I walked along the railway embankment.
    

      “Silly woman,” I thought, looking at the sky spangled with
      brilliant stars. “Even if one admits that omens sometimes tell the
      truth, what evil can happen to us? The misfortunes we have endured
      already, and which are facing us now, are so great that it is difficult to
      imagine anything worse. What further harm can you do a fish which has been
      caught and fried and served up with sauce?”
    

      A poplar covered with hoar frost looked in the bluish darkness like a
      giant wrapt in a shroud. It looked at me sullenly and dejectedly, as
      though like me it realized its loneliness. I stood a long while looking at
      it.
    

      “My youth is thrown away for nothing, like a useless cigarette end,”
      I went on musing. “My parents died when I was a little child; I was
      expelled from the high school, I was born of a noble family, but I have
      received neither education nor breeding, and I have no more knowledge than
      the humblest mechanic. I have no refuge, no relations, no friends, no work
      I like. I am not fitted for anything, and in the prime of my powers I am
      good for nothing but to be stuffed into this little station; I have known
      nothing but trouble and failure all my life. What can happen worse?”
    

      Red lights came into sight in the distance. A train was moving towards me.
      The slumbering steppe listened to the sound of it. My thoughts were so
      bitter that it seemed to me that I was thinking aloud and that the moan of
      the telegraph wire and the rumble of the train were expressing my
      thoughts.
    

      “What can happen worse? The loss of my wife?” I wondered.
      “Even that is not terrible. It’s no good hiding it from my
      conscience: I don’t love my wife. I married her when I was only a
      wretched boy; now I am young and vigorous, and she has gone off and grown
      older and sillier, stuffed from her head to her heels with conventional
      ideas. What charm is there in her maudlin love, in her hollow chest, in
      her lusterless eyes? I put up with her, but I don’t love her. What
      can happen? My youth is being wasted, as the saying is, for a pinch of
      snuff. Women flit before my eyes only in the carriage windows, like
      falling stars. Love I never had and have not. My manhood, my courage, my
      power of feeling are going to ruin.... Everything is being thrown away
      like dirt, and all my wealth here in the steppe is not worth a farthing.”
    

      The train rushed past me with a roar and indifferently cast the glow of
      its red lights upon me. I saw it stop by the green lights of the station,
      stop for a minute and rumble off again. After walking a mile and a half I
      went back. Melancholy thoughts haunted me still. Painful as it was to me,
      yet I remember I tried as it were to make my thoughts still gloomier and
      more melancholy. You know people who are vain and not very clever have
      moments when the consciousness that they are miserable affords them
      positive satisfaction, and they even coquet with their misery for their
      own entertainment. There was a great deal of truth in what I thought, but
      there was also a great deal that was absurd and conceited, and there was
      something boyishly defiant in my question: “What could happen worse?”
    

      “And what is there to happen?” I asked myself. “I think
      I have endured everything. I’ve been ill, I’ve lost money, I
      get reprimanded by my superiors every day, and I go hungry, and a mad wolf
      has run into the station yard. What more is there? I have been insulted,
      humiliated,... and I have insulted others in my time. I have not been a
      criminal, it is true, but I don’t think I am capable of crime—I
      am not afraid of being hauled up for it.”
    

      The two little clouds had moved away from the moon and stood at a little
      distance, looking as though they were whispering about something which the
      moon must not know. A light breeze was racing across the steppe, bringing
      the faint rumble of the retreating train.
    

      My wife met me at the doorway. Her eyes were laughing gaily and her whole
      face was beaming with good-humor.
    

      “There is news for you!” she whispered. “Make haste, go
      to your room and put on your new coat; we have a visitor.”
    

      “What visitor?”
    

      “Aunt Natalya Petrovna has just come by the train.”
    

      “What Natalya Petrovna?”
    

      “The wife of my uncle Semyon Fyodoritch. You don’t know her.
      She is a very nice, good woman.”
    

      Probably I frowned, for my wife looked grave and whispered rapidly:
    

      “Of course it is queer her having come, but don’t be cross,
      Nikolay, and don’t be hard on her. She is unhappy, you know; Uncle
      Semyon Fyodoritch really is ill-natured and tyrannical, it is difficult to
      live with him. She says she will only stay three days with us, only till
      she gets a letter from her brother.”
    

      My wife whispered a great deal more nonsense to me about her despotic
      uncle; about the weakness of mankind in general and of young wives in
      particular; about its being our duty to give shelter to all, even great
      sinners, and so on. Unable to make head or tail of it, I put on my new
      coat and went to make acquaintance with my “aunt.”
    

      A little woman with large black eyes was sitting at the table. My table,
      the gray walls, my roughly-made sofa, everything to the tiniest grain of
      dust seemed to have grown younger and more cheerful in the presence of
      this new, young, beautiful, and dissolute creature, who had a most subtle
      perfume about her. And that our visitor was a lady of easy virtue I could
      see from her smile, from her scent, from the peculiar way in which she
      glanced and made play with her eyelashes, from the tone in which she
      talked with my wife—a respectable woman. There was no need to tell
      me she had run away from her husband, that her husband was old and
      despotic, that she was good-natured and lively; I took it all in at the
      first glance. Indeed, it is doubtful whether there is a man in all Europe
      who cannot spot at the first glance a woman of a certain temperament.
    

      “I did not know I had such a big nephew!” said my aunt,
      holding out her hand to me and smiling.
    

      “And I did not know I had such a pretty aunt,” I answered.
    

      Supper began over again. The cork flew with a bang out of the second
      bottle, and my aunt swallowed half a glassful at a gulp, and when my wife
      went out of the room for a moment my aunt did not scruple to drain a full
      glass. I was drunk both with the wine and with the presence of a woman. Do
      you remember the song?
    

“Eyes black as pitch, eyes full of passion,
Eyes burning bright and beautiful,
How I love you,
How I fear you!”


      I don’t remember what happened next. Anyone who wants to know how
      love begins may read novels and long stories; I will put it shortly and in
      the words of the same silly song:
    

“It was an evil hour
When first I met you.”


      Everything went head over heels to the devil. I remember a fearful,
      frantic whirlwind which sent me flying round like a feather. It lasted a
      long while, and swept from the face of the earth my wife and my aunt
      herself and my strength. From the little station in the steppe it has
      flung me, as you see, into this dark street.
    

      Now tell me what further evil can happen to me?
    







      AFTER THE THEATRE
    

NADYA ZELENIN had
      just come back with her mamma from the theatre where she had seen a
      performance of “Yevgeny Onyegin.” As soon as she reached her
      own room she threw off her dress, let down her hair, and in her petticoat
      and white dressing-jacket hastily sat down to the table to write a letter
      like Tatyana’s.
    

      “I love you,” she wrote, “but you do not love me, do not
      love me!”
    

      She wrote it and laughed.
    

      She was only sixteen and did not yet love anyone. She knew that an officer
      called Gorny and a student called Gruzdev loved her, but now after the
      opera she wanted to be doubtful of their love. To be unloved and unhappy—how
      interesting that was. There is something beautiful, touching, and poetical
      about it when one loves and the other is indifferent. Onyegin was
      interesting because he was not in love at all, and Tatyana was fascinating
      because she was so much in love; but if they had been equally in love with
      each other and had been happy, they would perhaps have seemed dull.
    

      “Leave off declaring that you love me,” Nadya went on writing,
      thinking of Gorny. “I cannot believe it. You are very clever,
      cultivated, serious, you have immense talent, and perhaps a brilliant
      future awaits you, while I am an uninteresting girl of no importance, and
      you know very well that I should be only a hindrance in your life. It is
      true that you were attracted by me and thought you had found your ideal in
      me, but that was a mistake, and now you are asking yourself in despair:
      ‘Why did I meet that girl?’ And only your goodness of heart
      prevents you from owning it to yourself....”
    

      Nadya felt sorry for herself, she began to cry, and went on:
    

      “It is hard for me to leave my mother and my brother, or I should
      take a nun’s veil and go whither chance may lead me. And you would
      be left free and would love another. Oh, if I were dead!”
    

      She could not make out what she had written through her tears; little
      rainbows were quivering on the table, on the floor, on the ceiling, as
      though she were looking through a prism. She could not write, she sank
      back in her easy-chair and fell to thinking of Gorny.
    

      My God! how interesting, how fascinating men were! Nadya recalled the fine
      expression, ingratiating, guilty, and soft, which came into the officer’s
      face when one argued about music with him, and the effort he made to
      prevent his voice from betraying his passion. In a society where cold
      haughtiness and indifference are regarded as signs of good breeding and
      gentlemanly bearing, one must conceal one’s passions. And he did try
      to conceal them, but he did not succeed, and everyone knew very well that
      he had a passionate love of music. The endless discussions about music and
      the bold criticisms of people who knew nothing about it kept him always on
      the strain; he was frightened, timid, and silent. He played the piano
      magnificently, like a professional pianist, and if he had not been in the
      army he would certainly have been a famous musician.
    

      The tears on her eyes dried. Nadya remembered that Gorny had declared his
      love at a Symphony concert, and again downstairs by the hatstand where
      there was a tremendous draught blowing in all directions.
    

      “I am very glad that you have at last made the acquaintance of
      Gruzdev, our student friend,” she went on writing. “He is a
      very clever man, and you will be sure to like him. He came to see us
      yesterday and stayed till two o’clock. We were all delighted with
      him, and I regretted that you had not come. He said a great deal that was
      remarkable.”
    

      Nadya laid her arms on the table and leaned her head on them, and her hair
      covered the letter. She recalled that the student, too, loved her, and
      that he had as much right to a letter from her as Gorny. Wouldn’t it
      be better after all to write to Gruzdev? There was a stir of joy in her
      bosom for no reason whatever; at first the joy was small, and rolled in
      her bosom like an india-rubber ball; then it became more massive, bigger,
      and rushed like a wave. Nadya forgot Gorny and Gruzdev; her thoughts were
      in a tangle and her joy grew and grew; from her bosom it passed into her
      arms and legs, and it seemed as though a light, cool breeze were breathing
      on her head and ruffling her hair. Her shoulders quivered with subdued
      laughter, the table and the lamp chimney shook, too, and tears from her
      eyes splashed on the letter. She could not stop laughing, and to prove to
      herself that she was not laughing about nothing she made haste to think of
      something funny.
    

      “What a funny poodle,” she said, feeling as though she would
      choke with laughter. “What a funny poodle!”
    

      She thought how, after tea the evening before, Gruzdev had played with
      Maxim the poodle, and afterwards had told them about a very intelligent
      poodle who had run after a crow in the yard, and the crow had looked round
      at him and said: “Oh, you scamp!”
    

      The poodle, not knowing he had to do with a learned crow, was fearfully
      confused and retreated in perplexity, then began barking....
    

      “No, I had better love Gruzdev,” Nadya decided, and she tore
      up the letter to Gorny.
    

      She fell to thinking of the student, of his love, of her love; but the
      thoughts in her head insisted on flowing in all directions, and she
      thought about everything—about her mother, about the street, about
      the pencil, about the piano.... She thought of them joyfully, and felt
      that everything was good, splendid, and her joy told her that this was not
      all, that in a little while it would be better still. Soon it would be
      spring, summer, going with her mother to Gorbiki. Gorny would come for his
      furlough, would walk about the garden with her and make love to her.
      Gruzdev would come too. He would play croquet and skittles with her, and
      would tell her wonderful things. She had a passionate longing for the
      garden, the darkness, the pure sky, the stars. Again her shoulders shook
      with laughter, and it seemed to her that there was a scent of wormwood in
      the room and that a twig was tapping at the window.
    

      She went to her bed, sat down, and not knowing what to do with the immense
      joy which filled her with yearning, she looked at the holy image hanging
      at the back of her bed, and said:
    

      “Oh, Lord God! Oh, Lord God!”
    







      A LADY’S STORY
    

NINE years ago
      Pyotr Sergeyitch, the deputy prosecutor, and I were riding towards evening
      in hay-making time to fetch the letters from the station.
    

      The weather was magnificent, but on our way back we heard a peal of
      thunder, and saw an angry black storm-cloud which was coming straight
      towards us. The storm-cloud was approaching us and we were approaching it.
    

      Against the background of it our house and church looked white and the
      tall poplars shone like silver. There was a scent of rain and mown hay. My
      companion was in high spirits. He kept laughing and talking all sorts of
      nonsense. He said it would be nice if we could suddenly come upon a
      medieval castle with turreted towers, with moss on it and owls, in which
      we could take shelter from the rain and in the end be killed by a
      thunderbolt....
    

      Then the first wave raced through the rye and a field of oats, there was a
      gust of wind, and the dust flew round and round in the air. Pyotr
      Sergeyitch laughed and spurred on his horse.
    

      “It’s fine!” he cried, “it’s splendid!”
    

      Infected by his gaiety, I too began laughing at the thought that in a
      minute I should be drenched to the skin and might be struck by lightning.
    

      Riding swiftly in a hurricane when one is breathless with the wind, and
      feels like a bird, thrills one and puts one’s heart in a flutter. By
      the time we rode into our courtyard the wind had gone down, and big drops
      of rain were pattering on the grass and on the roofs. There was not a soul
      near the stable.
    

      Pyotr Sergeyitch himself took the bridles off, and led the horses to their
      stalls. I stood in the doorway waiting for him to finish, and watching the
      slanting streaks of rain; the sweetish, exciting scent of hay was even
      stronger here than in the fields; the storm-clouds and the rain made it
      almost twilight.
    

      “What a crash!” said Pyotr Sergeyitch, coming up to me after a
      very loud rolling peal of thunder when it seemed as though the sky were
      split in two. “What do you say to that?”
    

      He stood beside me in the doorway and, still breathless from his rapid
      ride, looked at me. I could see that he was admiring me.
    

      “Natalya Vladimirovna,” he said, “I would give anything
      only to stay here a little longer and look at you. You are lovely to-day.”
    

      His eyes looked at me with delight and supplication, his face was pale. On
      his beard and mustache were glittering raindrops, and they, too, seemed to
      be looking at me with love.
    

      “I love you,” he said. “I love you, and I am happy at
      seeing you. I know you cannot be my wife, but I want nothing, I ask
      nothing; only know that I love you. Be silent, do not answer me, take no
      notice of it, but only know that you are dear to me and let me look at
      you.”
    

      His rapture affected me too; I looked at his enthusiastic face, listened
      to his voice which mingled with the patter of the rain, and stood as
      though spellbound, unable to stir.
    

      I longed to go on endlessly looking at his shining eyes and listening.
    

      “You say nothing, and that is splendid,” said Pyotr
      Sergeyitch. “Go on being silent.”
    

      I felt happy. I laughed with delight and ran through the drenching rain to
      the house; he laughed too, and, leaping as he went, ran after me.
    

      Both drenched, panting, noisily clattering up the stairs like children, we
      dashed into the room. My father and brother, who were not used to seeing
      me laughing and light-hearted, looked at me in surprise and began laughing
      too.
    

      The storm-clouds had passed over and the thunder had ceased, but the
      raindrops still glittered on Pyotr Sergeyitch’s beard. The whole
      evening till supper-time he was singing, whistling, playing noisily with
      the dog and racing about the room after it, so that he nearly upset the
      servant with the samovar. And at supper he ate a great deal, talked
      nonsense, and maintained that when one eats fresh cucumbers in winter
      there is the fragrance of spring in one’s mouth.
    

      When I went to bed I lighted a candle and threw my window wide open, and
      an undefined feeling took possession of my soul. I remembered that I was
      free and healthy, that I had rank and wealth, that I was beloved; above
      all, that I had rank and wealth, rank and wealth, my God! how nice that
      was!... Then, huddling up in bed at a touch of cold which reached me from
      the garden with the dew, I tried to discover whether I loved Pyotr
      Sergeyitch or not,... and fell asleep unable to reach any conclusion.
    

      And when in the morning I saw quivering patches of sunlight and the
      shadows of the lime trees on my bed, what had happened yesterday rose
      vividly in my memory. Life seemed to me rich, varied, full of charm.
      Humming, I dressed quickly and went out into the garden....
    

      And what happened afterwards? Why—nothing. In the winter when we
      lived in town Pyotr Sergeyitch came to see us from time to time. Country
      acquaintances are charming only in the country and in summer; in the town
      and in winter they lose their charm. When you pour out tea for them in the
      town it seems as though they are wearing other people’s coats, and
      as though they stirred their tea too long. In the town, too, Pyotr
      Sergeyitch spoke sometimes of love, but the effect was not at all the same
      as in the country. In the town we were more vividly conscious of the wall
      that stood between us. I had rank and wealth, while he was poor, and he
      was not even a nobleman, but only the son of a deacon and a deputy public
      prosecutor; we both of us—I through my youth and he for some unknown
      reason—thought of that wall as very high and thick, and when he was
      with us in the town he would criticize aristocratic society with a forced
      smile, and maintain a sullen silence when there was anyone else in the
      drawing-room. There is no wall that cannot be broken through, but the
      heroes of the modern romance, so far as I know them, are too timid,
      spiritless, lazy, and oversensitive, and are too ready to resign
      themselves to the thought that they are doomed to failure, that personal
      life has disappointed them; instead of struggling they merely criticize,
      calling the world vulgar and forgetting that their criticism passes little
      by little into vulgarity.
    

      I was loved, happiness was not far away, and seemed to be almost touching
      me; I went on living in careless ease without trying to understand myself,
      not knowing what I expected or what I wanted from life, and time went on
      and on.... People passed by me with their love, bright days and warm
      nights flashed by, the nightingales sang, the hay smelt fragrant, and all
      this, sweet and overwhelming in remembrance, passed with me as with
      everyone rapidly, leaving no trace, was not prized, and vanished like
      mist.... Where is it all?
    

      My father is dead, I have grown older; everything that delighted me,
      caressed me, gave me hope—the patter of the rain, the rolling of the
      thunder, thoughts of happiness, talk of love—all that has become
      nothing but a memory, and I see before me a flat desert distance; on the
      plain not one living soul, and out there on the horizon it is dark and
      terrible....
    

      A ring at the bell.... It is Pyotr Sergeyitch. When in the winter I see
      the trees and remember how green they were for me in the summer I whisper:
    

      “Oh, my darlings!”
    

      And when I see people with whom I spent my spring-time, I feel sorrowful
      and warm and whisper the same thing.
    

      He has long ago by my father’s good offices been transferred to
      town. He looks a little older, a little fallen away. He has long given up
      declaring his love, has left off talking nonsense, dislikes his official
      work, is ill in some way and disillusioned; he has given up trying to get
      anything out of life, and takes no interest in living. Now he has sat down
      by the hearth and looks in silence at the fire....
    

      Not knowing what to say I ask him:
    

      “Well, what have you to tell me?”
    

      “Nothing,” he answers.
    

      And silence again. The red glow of the fire plays about his melancholy
      face.
    

      I thought of the past, and all at once my shoulders began quivering, my
      head dropped, and I began weeping bitterly. I felt unbearably sorry for
      myself and for this man, and passionately longed for what had passed away
      and what life refused us now. And now I did not think about rank and
      wealth.
    

      I broke into loud sobs, pressing my temples, and muttered:
    

      “My God! my God! my life is wasted!”
    

      And he sat and was silent, and did not say to me: “Don’t weep.”
      He understood that I must weep, and that the time for this had come.
    

      I saw from his eyes that he was sorry for me; and I was sorry for him,
      too, and vexed with this timid, unsuccessful man who could not make a life
      for me, nor for himself.
    

      When I saw him to the door, he was, I fancied, purposely a long while
      putting on his coat. Twice he kissed my hand without a word, and looked a
      long while into my tear-stained face. I believe at that moment he recalled
      the storm, the streaks of rain, our laughter, my face that day; he longed
      to say something to me, and he would have been glad to say it; but he said
      nothing, he merely shook his head and pressed my hand. God help him!
    

      After seeing him out, I went back to my study and again sat on the carpet
      before the fireplace; the red embers were covered with ash and began to
      grow dim. The frost tapped still more angrily at the windows, and the wind
      droned in the chimney.
    

      The maid came in and, thinking I was asleep, called my name.
    







      IN EXILE
    

OLD SEMYON,
      nicknamed Canny, and a young Tatar, whom no one knew by name, were sitting
      on the river-bank by the camp-fire; the other three ferrymen were in the
      hut. Semyon, an old man of sixty, lean and toothless, but broad shouldered
      and still healthy-looking, was drunk; he would have gone in to sleep long
      before, but he had a bottle in his pocket and he was afraid that the
      fellows in the hut would ask him for vodka. The Tatar was ill and weary,
      and wrapping himself up in his rags was describing how nice it was in the
      Simbirsk province, and what a beautiful and clever wife he had left behind
      at home. He was not more than twenty five, and now by the light of the
      camp-fire, with his pale and sick, mournful face, he looked like a boy.
    

      “To be sure, it is not paradise here,” said Canny. “You
      can see for yourself, the water, the bare banks, clay, and nothing
      else.... Easter has long passed and yet there is ice on the river, and
      this morning there was snow...”
    

      “It’s bad! it’s bad!” said the Tatar, and looked
      round him in terror.
    

      The dark, cold river was flowing ten paces away; it grumbled, lapped
      against the hollow clay banks and raced on swiftly towards the far-away
      sea. Close to the bank there was the dark blur of a big barge, which the
      ferrymen called a “karbos.” Far away on the further bank,
      lights, dying down and flickering up again, zigzagged like little snakes;
      they were burning last year’s grass. And beyond the little snakes
      there was darkness again. There little icicles could be heard knocking
      against the barge. It was damp and cold....
    

      The Tatar glanced at the sky. There were as many stars as at home, and the
      same blackness all round, but something was lacking. At home in the
      Simbirsk province the stars were quite different, and so was the sky.
    

      “It’s bad! it’s bad!” he repeated.
    

      “You will get used to it,” said Semyon, and he laughed.
      “Now you are young and foolish, the milk is hardly dry on your lips,
      and it seems to you in your foolishness that you are more wretched than
      anyone; but the time will come when you will say to yourself: ‘I
      wish no one a better life than mine.’ You look at me. Within a week
      the floods will be over and we shall set up the ferry; you will all go
      wandering off about Siberia while I shall stay and shall begin going from
      bank to bank. I’ve been going like that for twenty-two years, day
      and night. The pike and the salmon are under the water while I am on the
      water. And thank God for it, I want nothing; God give everyone such a
      life.”
    

      The Tatar threw some dry twigs on the camp-fire, lay down closer to the
      blaze, and said:
    

      “My father is a sick man. When he dies my mother and wife will come
      here. They have promised.”
    

      “And what do you want your wife and mother for?” asked Canny.
      “That’s mere foolishness, my lad. It’s the devil
      confounding you, damn his soul! Don’t you listen to him, the cursed
      one. Don’t let him have his way. He is at you about the women, but
      you spite him; say, ‘I don’t want them!’ He is on at you
      about freedom, but you stand up to him and say: ‘I don’t want
      it!’ I want nothing, neither father nor mother, nor wife, nor
      freedom, nor post, nor paddock; I want nothing, damn their souls!”
    

      Semyon took a pull at the bottle and went on:
    

      “I am not a simple peasant, not of the working class, but the son of
      a deacon, and when I was free I lived at Kursk; I used to wear a
      frockcoat, and now I have brought myself to such a pass that I can sleep
      naked on the ground and eat grass. And I wish no one a better life. I want
      nothing and I am afraid of nobody, and the way I look at it is that there
      is nobody richer and freer than I am. When they sent me here from Russia
      from the first day I stuck it out; I want nothing! The devil was at me
      about my wife and about my home and about freedom, but I told him: ‘I
      want nothing.’ I stuck to it, and here you see I live well, and I
      don’t complain, and if anyone gives way to the devil and listens to
      him, if but once, he is lost, there is no salvation for him: he is sunk in
      the bog to the crown of his head and will never get out.
    

      “It is not only a foolish peasant like you, but even gentlemen,
      well-educated people, are lost. Fifteen years ago they sent a gentleman
      here from Russia. He hadn’t shared something with his brothers and
      had forged something in a will. They did say he was a prince or a baron,
      but maybe he was simply an official—who knows? Well, the gentleman
      arrived here, and first thing he bought himself a house and land in
      Muhortinskoe. ‘I want to live by my own work,’ says he,
      ‘in the sweat of my brow, for I am not a gentleman now,’ says
      he, ‘but a settler.’ ‘Well,’ says I, ‘God
      help you, that’s the right thing.’ He was a young man then,
      busy and careful; he used to mow himself and catch fish and ride sixty
      miles on horseback. Only this is what happened: from the very first year
      he took to riding to Gyrino for the post; he used to stand on my ferry and
      sigh: ‘Ech, Semyon, how long it is since they sent me any money from
      home!’ ‘You don’t want money, Vassily Sergeyitch,’
      says I. ‘What use is it to you? You cast away the past, and forget
      it as though it had never been at all, as though it had been a dream, and
      begin to live anew. Don’t listen to the devil,’ says I;
      ‘he will bring you to no good, he’ll draw you into a snare.
      Now you want money,’ says I, ‘but in a very little while you’ll
      be wanting something else, and then more and more. If you want to be
      happy,’ says I, the chief thing is not to want anything. Yes.... If,’
      says I, ‘if Fate has wronged you and me cruelly it’s no good
      asking for her favor and bowing down to her, but you despise her and laugh
      at her, or else she will laugh at you.’ That’s what I said to
      him....
    

      “Two years later I ferried him across to this side, and he was
      rubbing his hands and laughing. ‘I am going to Gyrino to meet my
      wife,’ says he. ‘She was sorry for me,’ says he; ‘she
      has come. She is good and kind.’ And he was breathless with joy. So
      a day later he came with his wife. A beautiful young lady in a hat; in her
      arms was a baby girl. And lots of luggage of all sorts. And my Vassily
      Sergeyitch was fussing round her; he couldn’t take his eyes off her
      and couldn’t say enough in praise of her. ‘Yes, brother
      Semyon, even in Siberia people can live!’ ‘Oh, all right,’
      thinks I, ‘it will be a different tale presently.’ And from
      that time forward he went almost every week to inquire whether money had
      not come from Russia. He wanted a lot of money. ‘She is losing her
      youth and beauty here in Siberia for my sake,’ says he, ‘and
      sharing my bitter lot with me, and so I ought,’ says he, ‘to
      provide her with every comfort....’
    

      “To make it livelier for the lady he made acquaintance with the
      officials and all sorts of riff-raff. And of course he had to give food
      and drink to all that crew, and there had to be a piano and a shaggy
      lapdog on the sofa—plague take it!... Luxury, in fact,
      self-indulgence. The lady did not stay with him long. How could she? The
      clay, the water, the cold, no vegetables for you, no fruit. All around you
      ignorant and drunken people and no sort of manners, and she was a spoilt
      lady from Petersburg or Moscow.... To be sure she moped. Besides, her
      husband, say what you like, was not a gentleman now, but a settler—not
      the same rank.
    

      “Three years later, I remember, on the eve of the Assumption, there
      was shouting from the further bank. I went over with the ferry, and what
      do I see but the lady, all wrapped up, and with her a young gentleman, an
      official. A sledge with three horses.... I ferried them across here, they
      got in and away like the wind. They were soon lost to sight. And towards
      morning Vassily Sergeyitch galloped down to the ferry. ‘Didn’t
      my wife come this way with a gentleman in spectacles, Semyon?’
      ‘She did,’ said I; ‘you may look for the wind in the
      fields!’ He galloped in pursuit of them. For five days and nights he
      was riding after them. When I ferried him over to the other side
      afterwards, he flung himself on the ferry and beat his head on the boards
      of the ferry and howled. ‘So that’s how it is,’ says I.
      I laughed, and reminded him ‘people can live even in Siberia!’
      And he beat his head harder than ever....
    

      “Then he began longing for freedom. His wife had slipped off to
      Russia, and of course he was drawn there to see her and to get her away
      from her lover. And he took, my lad, to galloping almost every day, either
      to the post or the town to see the commanding officer; he kept sending in
      petitions for them to have mercy on him and let him go back home; and he
      used to say that he had spent some two hundred roubles on telegrams alone.
      He sold his land and mortgaged his house to the Jews. He grew gray and
      bent, and yellow in the face, as though he was in consumption. If he
      talked to you he would go, khee—khee—khee,... and there were
      tears in his eyes. He kept rushing about like this with petitions for
      eight years, but now he has grown brighter and more cheerful again: he has
      found another whim to give way to. You see, his daughter has grown up. He
      looks at her, and she is the apple of his eye. And to tell the truth she
      is all right, good-looking, with black eyebrows and a lively disposition.
      Every Sunday he used to ride with her to church in Gyrino. They used to
      stand on the ferry, side by side, she would laugh and he could not take
      his eyes off her. ‘Yes, Semyon,’ says he, ‘people can
      live even in Siberia. Even in Siberia there is happiness. Look,’
      says he, ‘what a daughter I have got! I warrant you wouldn’t
      find another like her for a thousand versts round.’ ‘Your
      daughter is all right,’ says I, ‘that’s true, certainly.’
      But to myself I thought: ‘Wait a bit, the wench is young, her blood
      is dancing, she wants to live, and there is no life here.’ And she
      did begin to pine, my lad.... She faded and faded, and now she can hardly
      crawl about. Consumption.
    

      “So you see what Siberian happiness is, damn its soul! You see how
      people can live in Siberia.... He has taken to going from one doctor to
      another and taking them home with him. As soon as he hears that two or
      three hundred miles away there is a doctor or a sorcerer, he will drive to
      fetch him. A terrible lot of money he spent on doctors, and to my thinking
      he had better have spent the money on drink.... She’ll die just the
      same. She is certain to die, and then it will be all over with him. He’ll
      hang himself from grief or run away to Russia—that’s a sure
      thing. He’ll run away and they’ll catch him, then he will be
      tried, sent to prison, he will have a taste of the lash....”
    

      “Good! good!” said the Tatar, shivering with cold.
    

      “What is good?” asked Canny.
    

      “His wife, his daughter.... What of prison and what of sorrow!—anyway,
      he did see his wife and his daughter.... You say, want nothing. But
      ‘nothing’ is bad! His wife lived with him three years—that
      was a gift from God. ‘Nothing’ is bad, but three years is
      good. How not understand?”
    

      Shivering and hesitating, with effort picking out the Russian words of
      which he knew but few, the Tatar said that God forbid one should fall sick
      and die in a strange land, and be buried in the cold and dark earth; that
      if his wife came to him for one day, even for one hour, that for such
      happiness he would be ready to bear any suffering and to thank God. Better
      one day of happiness than nothing.
    

      Then he described again what a beautiful and clever wife he had left at
      home. Then, clutching his head in both hands, he began crying and assuring
      Semyon that he was not guilty, and was suffering for nothing. His two
      brothers and an uncle had carried off a peasant’s horses, and had
      beaten the old man till he was half dead, and the commune had not judged
      fairly, but had contrived a sentence by which all the three brothers were
      sent to Siberia, while the uncle, a rich man, was left at home.
    

      “You will get used to it!” said Semyon.
    

      The Tatar was silent, and stared with tear-stained eyes at the fire; his
      face expressed bewilderment and fear, as though he still did not
      understand why he was here in the darkness and the wet, beside strangers,
      and not in the Simbirsk province.
    

      Canny lay near the fire, chuckled at something, and began humming a song
      in an undertone.
    

      “What joy has she with her father?” he said a little later.
      “He loves her and he rejoices in her, that’s true; but, mate,
      you must mind your ps and qs with him, he is a strict old man, a harsh old
      man. And young wenches don’t want strictness. They want petting and
      ha-ha-ha! and ho-ho-ho! and scent and pomade. Yes.... Ech! life, life,”
      sighed Semyon, and he got up heavily. “The vodka is all gone, so it
      is time to sleep. Eh? I am going, my lad....”
    

      Left alone, the Tatar put on more twigs, lay down and stared at the fire;
      he began thinking of his own village and of his wife. If his wife could
      only come for a month, for a day; and then if she liked she might go back
      again. Better a month or even a day than nothing. But if his wife kept her
      promise and came, what would he have to feed her on? Where could she live
      here?
    

      “If there were not something to eat, how could she live?” the
      Tatar asked aloud.
    

      He was paid only ten kopecks for working all day and all night at the oar;
      it is true that travelers gave him tips for tea and for vodkas but the men
      shared all they received among themselves, and gave nothing to the Tatar,
      but only laughed at him. And from poverty he was hungry, cold, and
      frightened.... Now, when his whole body was aching and shivering, he ought
      to go into the hut and lie down to sleep; but he had nothing to cover him
      there, and it was colder than on the river-bank; here he had nothing to
      cover him either, but at least he could make up the fire....
    

      In another week, when the floods were quite over and they set the ferry
      going, none of the ferrymen but Semyon would be wanted, and the Tatar
      would begin going from village to village begging for alms and for work.
      His wife was only seventeen; she was beautiful, spoilt, and shy; could she
      possibly go from village to village begging alms with her face unveiled?
      No, it was terrible even to think of that....
    

      It was already getting light; the barge, the bushes of willow on the
      water, and the waves could be clearly discerned, and if one looked round
      there was the steep clay slope; at the bottom of it the hut thatched with
      dingy brown straw, and the huts of the village lay clustered higher up.
      The cocks were already crowing in the village.
    

      The rusty red clay slope, the barge, the river, the strange, unkind
      people, hunger, cold, illness, perhaps all that was not real. Most likely
      it was all a dream, thought the Tatar. He felt that he was asleep and
      heard his own snoring.... Of course he was at home in the Simbirsk
      province, and he had only to call his wife by name for her to answer; and
      in the next room was his mother.... What terrible dreams there are,
      though! What are they for? The Tatar smiled and opened his eyes. What
      river was this, the Volga?
    

      Snow was falling.
    

      “Boat!” was shouted on the further side. “Boat!”
    

      The Tatar woke up, and went to wake his mates and row over to the other
      side. The ferrymen came on to the river-bank, putting on their torn
      sheepskins as they walked, swearing with voices husky from sleepiness and
      shivering from the cold. On waking from their sleep, the river, from which
      came a breath of piercing cold, seemed to strike them as revolting and
      horrible. They jumped into the barge without hurrying themselves.... The
      Tatar and the three ferrymen took the long, broad-bladed oars, which in
      the darkness looked like the claws of crabs; Semyon leaned his stomach
      against the tiller. The shout on the other side still continued, and two
      shots were fired from a revolver, probably with the idea that the ferrymen
      were asleep or had gone to the pot-house in the village.
    

      “All right, you have plenty of time,” said Semyon in the tone
      of a man convinced that there was no necessity in this world to hurry—that
      it would lead to nothing, anyway.
    

      The heavy, clumsy barge moved away from the bank and floated between the
      willow-bushes, and only the willows slowly moving back showed that the
      barge was not standing still but moving. The ferrymen swung the oars
      evenly in time; Semyon lay with his stomach on the tiller and, describing
      a semicircle in the air, flew from one side to the other. In the darkness
      it looked as though the men were sitting on some antediluvian animal with
      long paws, and were moving on it through a cold, desolate land, the land
      of which one sometimes dreams in nightmares.
    

      They passed beyond the willows and floated out into the open. The creak
      and regular splash of the oars was heard on the further shore, and a shout
      came: “Make haste! make haste!”
    

      Another ten minutes passed, and the barge banged heavily against the
      landing-stage.
    

      “And it keeps sprinkling and sprinkling,” muttered Semyon,
      wiping the snow from his face; “and where it all comes from God only
      knows.”
    

      On the bank stood a thin man of medium height in a jacket lined with fox
      fur and in a white lambskin cap. He was standing at a little distance from
      his horses and not moving; he had a gloomy, concentrated expression, as
      though he were trying to remember something and angry with his
      untrustworthy memory. When Semyon went up to him and took off his cap,
      smiling, he said:
    

      “I am hastening to Anastasyevka. My daughter’s worse again,
      and they say that there is a new doctor at Anastasyevka.”
    

      They dragged the carriage on to the barge and floated back. The man whom
      Semyon addressed as Vassily Sergeyitch stood all the time motionless,
      tightly compressing his thick lips and staring off into space; when his
      coachman asked permission to smoke in his presence he made no answer, as
      though he had not heard. Semyon, lying with his stomach on the tiller,
      looked mockingly at him and said:
    

      “Even in Siberia people can live—can li-ive!”
    

      There was a triumphant expression on Canny’s face, as though he had
      proved something and was delighted that things had happened as he had
      foretold. The unhappy helplessness of the man in the foxskin coat
      evidently afforded him great pleasure.
    

      “It’s muddy driving now, Vassily Sergeyitch,” he said
      when the horses were harnessed again on the bank. “You should have
      put off going for another fortnight, when it will be drier. Or else not
      have gone at all. ... If any good would come of your going—but as
      you know yourself, people have been driving about for years and years, day
      and night, and it’s always been no use. That’s the truth.”
    

      Vassily Sergeyitch tipped him without a word, got into his carriage and
      drove off.
    

      “There, he has galloped off for a doctor!” said Semyon,
      shrinking from the cold. “But looking for a good doctor is like
      chasing the wind in the fields or catching the devil by the tail, plague
      take your soul! What a queer chap, Lord forgive me a sinner!”
    

      The Tatar went up to Canny, and, looking at him with hatred and repulsion,
      shivering, and mixing Tatar words with his broken Russian, said: “He
      is good... good; but you are bad! You are bad! The gentleman is a good
      soul, excellent, and you are a beast, bad! The gentleman is alive, but you
      are a dead carcass.... God created man to be alive, and to have joy and
      grief and sorrow; but you want nothing, so you are not alive, you are
      stone, clay! A stone wants nothing and you want nothing. You are a stone,
      and God does not love you, but He loves the gentleman!”
    

      Everyone laughed; the Tatar frowned contemptuously, and with a wave of his
      hand wrapped himself in his rags and went to the campfire. The ferrymen
      and Semyon sauntered to the hut.
    

      “It’s cold,” said one ferryman huskily as he stretched
      himself on the straw with which the damp clay floor was covered.
    

      “Yes, it’s not warm,” another assented. “It’s
      a dog’s life....”
    

      They all lay down. The door was thrown open by the wind and the snow
      drifted into the hut; nobody felt inclined to get up and shut the door:
      they were cold, and it was too much trouble.
    

      “I am all right,” said Semyon as he began to doze. “I
      wouldn’t wish anyone a better life.”
    

      “You are a tough one, we all know. Even the devils won’t take
      you!”
    

      Sounds like a dog’s howling came from outside.
    

      “What’s that? Who’s there?”
    

      “It’s the Tatar crying.”
    

      “I say.... He’s a queer one!”
    

      “He’ll get u-used to it!” said Semyon, and at once fell
      asleep.
    

      The others were soon asleep too. The door remained unclosed.
    







      THE CATTLE-DEALERS
    

THE long goods
      train has been standing for hours in the little station. The engine is as
      silent as though its fire had gone out; there is not a soul near the train
      or in the station yard.
    

      A pale streak of light comes from one of the vans and glides over the
      rails of a siding. In that van two men are sitting on an outspread cape:
      one is an old man with a big gray beard, wearing a sheepskin coat and a
      high lambskin hat, somewhat like a busby; the other a beardless youth in a
      threadbare cloth reefer jacket and muddy high boots. They are the owners
      of the goods. The old man sits, his legs stretched out before him, musing
      in silence; the young man half reclines and softly strums on a cheap
      accordion. A lantern with a tallow candle in it is hanging on the wall
      near them.
    

      The van is quite full. If one glances in through the dim light of the
      lantern, for the first moment the eyes receive an impression of something
      shapeless, monstrous, and unmistakably alive, something very much like
      gigantic crabs which move their claws and feelers, crowd together, and
      noiselessly climb up the walls to the ceiling; but if one looks more
      closely, horns and their shadows, long lean backs, dirty hides, tails,
      eyes begin to stand out in the dusk. They are cattle and their shadows.
      There are eight of them in the van. Some turn round and stare at the men
      and swing their tails. Others try to stand or lie down more comfortably.
      They are crowded. If one lies down the others must stand and huddle
      closer. No manger, no halter, no litter, not a wisp of hay....*
    

      At last the old man pulls out of his pocket a silver watch and looks at
      the time: a quarter past two.
    

      “We have been here nearly two hours,” he says, yawning.
      “Better go and stir them up, or we may be here till morning. They
      have gone to sleep, or goodness knows what they are up to.”
    

      The old man gets up and, followed by his long shadow, cautiously gets down
      from the van into the darkness. He makes his way along beside the train to
      the engine, and after passing some two dozen vans sees a red open furnace;
      a human figure sits motionless facing it; its peaked cap, nose, and knees
      are lighted up by the crimson glow, all the rest is black and can scarcely
      be distinguished in the darkness.
    

      “Are we going to stay here much longer?” asks the old man.
    

      No answer. The motionless figure is evidently asleep. The old man clears
      his throat impatiently and, shrinking from the penetrating damp, walks
      round the engine, and as he does so the brilliant light of the two engine
      lamps dazzles his eyes for an instant and makes the night even blacker to
      him; he goes to the station.
    

      The platform and steps of the station are wet. Here and there are white
      patches of freshly fallen melting snow. In the station itself it is light
      and as hot as a steam-bath. There is a smell of paraffin. Except for the
      weighing-machine and a yellow seat on which a man wearing a guard’s
      uniform is asleep, there is no furniture in the place at all. On the left
      are two wide-open doors. Through one of them the telegraphic apparatus and
      a lamp with a green shade on it can be seen; through the other, a small
      room, half of it taken up by a dark cupboard. In this room the head guard
      and the engine-driver are sitting on the window-sill. They are both
      feeling a cap with their fingers and disputing.
    

      “That’s not real beaver, it’s imitation,” says the
      engine-driver. “Real beaver is not like that. Five roubles would be
      a high price for the whole cap, if you care to know!”
    

      “You know a great deal about it,...” the head guard says,
      offended. “Five roubles, indeed! Here, we will ask the merchant. Mr.
      Malahin,” he says, addressing the old man, “what do you say:
      is this imitation beaver or real?”
    

      Old Malahin takes the cap into his hand, and with the air of a connoisseur
      pinches the fur, blows on it, sniffs at it, and a contemptuous smile
      lights up his angry face.
    

      “It must be imitation!” he says gleefully. “Imitation it
      is.”
    

      A dispute follows. The guard maintains that the cap is real beaver, and
      the engine-driver and Malahin try to persuade him that it is not. In the
      middle of the argument the old man suddenly remembers the object of his
      coming.
    

      “Beaver and cap is all very well, but the train’s standing
      still, gentlemen!” he says. “Who is it we are waiting for? Let
      us start!”
    

      “Let us,” the guard agrees. “We will smoke another
      cigarette and go on. But there is no need to be in a hurry.... We shall be
      delayed at the next station anyway!”
    

      “Why should we?”
    

      “Oh, well.... We are too much behind time.... If you are late at one
      station you can’t help being delayed at the other stations to let
      the trains going the opposite way pass. Whether we set off now or in the
      morning we shan’t be number fourteen. We shall have to be number
      twenty-three.”
    

      “And how do you make that out?”
    

      “Well, there it is.”
    

      Malahin looks at the guard, reflects, and mutters mechanically as though
      to himself:
    

      “God be my judge, I have reckoned it and even jotted it down in a
      notebook; we have wasted thirty-four hours standing still on the journey.
      If you go on like this, either the cattle will die, or they won’t
      pay me two roubles for the meat when I do get there. It’s not
      traveling, but ruination.”
    

      The guard raises his eyebrows and sighs with an air that seems to say:
      “All that is unhappily true!” The engine-driver sits silent,
      dreamily looking at the cap. From their faces one can see that they have a
      secret thought in common, which they do not utter, not because they want
      to conceal it, but because such thoughts are much better expressed by
      signs than by words. And the old man understands. He feels in his pocket,
      takes out a ten-rouble note, and without preliminary words, without any
      change in the tone of his voice or the expression of his face, but with
      the confidence and directness with which probably only Russians give and
      take bribes, he gives the guard the note. The latter takes it, folds it in
      four, and without undue haste puts it in his pocket. After that all three
      go out of the room, and waking the sleeping guard on the way, go on to the
      platform.
    

      “What weather!” grumbles the head guard, shrugging his
      shoulders. “You can’t see your hand before your face.”
    

      “Yes, it’s vile weather.”
    

      From the window they can see the flaxen head of the telegraph clerk appear
      beside the green lamp and the telegraphic apparatus; soon after another
      head, bearded and wearing a red cap, appears beside it—no doubt that
      of the station-master. The station-master bends down to the table, reads
      something on a blue form, rapidly passing his cigarette along the
      lines.... Malahin goes to his van.
    

      The young man, his companion, is still half reclining and hardly audibly
      strumming on the accordion. He is little more than a boy, with no trace of
      a mustache; his full white face with its broad cheek-bones is childishly
      dreamy; his eyes have a melancholy and tranquil look unlike that of a
      grown-up person, but he is broad, strong, heavy and rough like the old
      man; he does not stir nor shift his position, as though he is not equal to
      moving his big body. It seems as though any movement he made would tear
      his clothes and be so noisy as to frighten both him and the cattle. From
      under his big fat fingers that clumsily pick out the stops and keys of the
      accordion comes a steady flow of thin, tinkling sounds which blend into a
      simple, monotonous little tune; he listens to it, and is evidently much
      pleased with his performance.
    

      A bell rings, but with such a muffled note that it seems to come from far
      away. A hurried second bell soon follows, then a third and the guard’s
      whistle. A minute passes in profound silence; the van does not move, it
      stands still, but vague sounds begin to come from beneath it, like the
      crunch of snow under sledge-runners; the van begins to shake and the
      sounds cease. Silence reigns again. But now comes the clank of buffers,
      the violent shock makes the van start and, as it were, give a lurch
      forward, and all the cattle fall against one another.
    

      “May you be served the same in the world to come,” grumbles
      the old man, setting straight his cap, which had slipped on the back of
      his head from the jolt. “He’ll maim all my cattle like this!”
    

      Yasha gets up without a word and, taking one of the fallen beasts by the
      horns, helps it to get on to its legs.... The jolt is followed by a
      stillness again. The sounds of crunching snow come from under the van
      again, and it seems as though the train had moved back a little.
    

      “There will be another jolt in a minute,” says the old man.
      And the convulsive quiver does, in fact, run along the train, there is a
      crashing sound and the bullocks fall on one another again.
    

      “It’s a job!” says Yasha, listening. “The train
      must be heavy. It seems it won’t move.”
    

      “It was not heavy before, but now it has suddenly got heavy. No, my
      lad, the guard has not gone shares with him, I expect. Go and take him
      something, or he will be jolting us till morning.”
    

      Yasha takes a three-rouble note from the old man and jumps out of the van.
      The dull thud of his heavy footsteps resounds outside the van and
      gradually dies away. Stillness.... In the next van a bullock utters a
      prolonged subdued “moo,” as though it were singing.
    

      Yasha comes back. A cold damp wind darts into the van.
    

      “Shut the door, Yasha, and we will go to bed,” says the old
      man. “Why burn a candle for nothing?”
    

      Yasha moves the heavy door; there is a sound of a whistle, the engine and
      the train set off.
    

      “It’s cold,” mutters the old man, stretching himself on
      the cape and laying his head on a bundle. “It is very different at
      home! It’s warm and clean and soft, and there is room to say your
      prayers, but here we are worse off than any pigs. It’s four days and
      nights since I have taken off my boots.”
    

      Yasha, staggering from the jolting of the train, opens the lantern and
      snuffs out the wick with his wet fingers. The light flares up, hisses like
      a frying pan and goes out.
    

      “Yes, my lad,” Malahin goes on, as he feels Yasha lie down
      beside him and the young man’s huge back huddle against his own,
      “it’s cold. There is a draught from every crack. If your
      mother or your sister were to sleep here for one night they would be dead
      by morning. There it is, my lad, you wouldn’t study and go to the
      high school like your brothers, so you must take the cattle with your
      father. It’s your own fault, you have only yourself to blame....
      Your brothers are asleep in their beds now, they are snug under the
      bedclothes, but you, the careless and lazy one, are in the same box as the
      cattle.... Yes.... ”
    

      The old man’s words are inaudible in the noise of the train, but for
      a long time he goes on muttering, sighing and clearing his throat.... The
      cold air in the railway van grows thicker and more stifling. The pungent
      odor of fresh dung and smoldering candle makes it so repulsive and acrid
      that it irritates Yasha’s throat and chest as he falls asleep. He
      coughs and sneezes, while the old man, being accustomed to it, breathes
      with his whole chest as though nothing were amiss, and merely clears his
      throat.
    

      To judge from the swaying of the van and the rattle of the wheels the
      train is moving rapidly and unevenly. The engine breathes heavily,
      snorting out of time with the pulsation of the train, and altogether there
      is a medley of sounds. The bullocks huddle together uneasily and knock
      their horns against the walls.
    

      When the old man wakes up, the deep blue sky of early morning is peeping
      in at the cracks and at the little uncovered window. He feels unbearably
      cold, especially in the back and the feet. The train is standing still;
      Yasha, sleepy and morose, is busy with the cattle.
    

      The old man wakes up out of humor. Frowning and gloomy, he clears his
      throat angrily and looks from under his brows at Yasha who, supporting a
      bullock with his powerful shoulder and slightly lifting it, is trying to
      disentangle its leg.
    

      “I told you last night that the cords were too long,” mutters
      the old man; “but no, ‘It’s not too long, Daddy.’
      There’s no making you do anything, you will have everything your own
      way.... Blockhead!”
    

      He angrily moves the door open and the light rushes into the van. A
      passenger train is standing exactly opposite the door, and behind it a red
      building with a roofed-in platform—a big station with a refreshment
      bar. The roofs and bridges of the trains, the earth, the sleepers, all are
      covered with a thin coating of fluffy, freshly fallen snow. In the spaces
      between the carriages of the passenger train the passengers can be seen
      moving to and fro, and a red-haired, red-faced gendarme walking up and
      down; a waiter in a frock-coat and a snow-white shirt-front, looking cold
      and sleepy, and probably very much dissatisfied with his fate, is running
      along the platform carrying a glass of tea and two rusks on a tray.
    

      The old man gets up and begins saying his prayers towards the east. Yasha,
      having finished with the bullock and put down the spade in the corner,
      stands beside him and says his prayers also. He merely moves his lips and
      crosses himself; the father prays in a loud whisper and pronounces the end
      of each prayer aloud and distinctly.
    

      “... And the life of the world to come. Amen,” the old man
      says aloud, draws in a breath, and at once whispers another prayer,
      rapping out clearly and firmly at the end: “... and lay calves upon
      Thy altar!”
    

      After saying his prayers, Yasha hurriedly crosses himself and says:
      “Five kopecks, please.”
    

      And on being given the five-kopeck piece, he takes a red copper teapot and
      runs to the station for boiling water. Taking long jumps over the rails
      and sleepers, leaving huge tracks in the feathery snow, and pouring away
      yesterday’s tea out of the teapot he runs to the refreshment room
      and jingles his five-kopeck piece against his teapot. From the van the
      bar-keeper can be seen pushing away the big teapot and refusing to give
      half of his samovar for five kopecks, but Yasha turns the tap himself and,
      spreading wide his elbows so as not to be interfered with fills his teapot
      with boiling water.
    

      “Damned blackguard!” the bar-keeper shouts after him as he
      runs back to the railway van.
    

      The scowling face of Malahin grows a little brighter over the tea.
    

      “We know how to eat and drink, but we don’t remember our work.
      Yesterday we could do nothing all day but eat and drink, and I’ll be
      bound we forgot to put down what we spent. What a memory! Lord have mercy
      on us!”
    

      The old man recalls aloud the expenditure of the day before, and writes
      down in a tattered notebook where and how much he had given to guards,
      engine-drivers, oilers....
    

      Meanwhile the passenger train has long ago gone off, and an engine runs
      backwards and forwards on the empty line, apparently without any definite
      object, but simply enjoying its freedom. The sun has risen and is playing
      on the snow; bright drops are falling from the station roof and the tops
      of the vans.
    

      Having finished his tea, the old man lazily saunters from the van to the
      station. Here in the middle of the first-class waiting-room he sees the
      familiar figure of the guard standing beside the station-master, a young
      man with a handsome beard and in a magnificent rough woollen overcoat. The
      young man, probably new to his position, stands in the same place,
      gracefully shifting from one foot to the other like a good racehorse,
      looks from side to side, salutes everyone that passes by, smiles and
      screws up his eyes.... He is red-cheeked, sturdy, and good-humored; his
      face is full of eagerness, and is as fresh as though he had just fallen
      from the sky with the feathery snow. Seeing Malahin, the guard sighs
      guiltily and throws up his hands.
    

      “We can’t go number fourteen,” he says. “We are
      very much behind time. Another train has gone with that number.”
    

      The station-master rapidly looks through some forms, then turns his
      beaming blue eyes upon Malahin, and, his face radiant with smiles and
      freshness, showers questions on him:
    

      “You are Mr. Malahin? You have the cattle? Eight vanloads? What is
      to be done now? You are late and I let number fourteen go in the night.
      What are we to do now?”
    

      The young man discreetly takes hold of the fur of Malahin’s coat
      with two pink fingers and, shifting from one foot to the other, explains
      affably and convincingly that such and such numbers have gone already, and
      that such and such are going, and that he is ready to do for Malahin
      everything in his power. And from his face it is evident that he is ready
      to do anything to please not only Malahin, but the whole world—he is
      so happy, so pleased, and so delighted! The old man listens, and though he
      can make absolutely nothing of the intricate system of numbering the
      trains, he nods his head approvingly, and he, too, puts two fingers on the
      soft wool of the rough coat. He enjoys seeing and hearing the polite and
      genial young man. To show goodwill on his side also, he takes out a
      ten-rouble note and, after a moment’s thought, adds a couple of
      rouble notes to it, and gives them to the station-master. The latter takes
      them, puts his finger to his cap, and gracefully thrusts them into his
      pocket.
    

      “Well, gentlemen, can’t we arrange it like this?” he
      says, kindled by a new idea that has flashed on him. “The troop
      train is late,... as you see, it is not here,... so why shouldn’t
      you go as the troop train?** And I will let the troop train go as
      twenty-eight. Eh?”
    

      “If you like,” agrees the guard.
    

      “Excellent!” the station-master says, delighted. “In
      that case there is no need for you to wait here; you can set off at once.
      I’ll dispatch you immediately. Excellent!”
    

      He salutes Malahin and runs off to his room, reading forms as he goes. The
      old man is very much pleased by the conversation that has just taken
      place; he smiles and looks about the room as though looking for something
      else agreeable.
    

      “We’ll have a drink, though,” he says, taking the guard’s
      arm.
    

      “It seems a little early for drinking.”
    

      “No, you must let me treat you to a glass in a friendly way.”
    

      They both go to the refreshment bar. After having a drink the guard spends
      a long time selecting something to eat.
    

      He is a very stout, elderly man, with a puffy and discolored face. His
      fatness is unpleasant, flabby-looking, and he is sallow as people are who
      drink too much and sleep irregularly.
    

      “And now we might have a second glass,” says Malahin. “It’s
      cold now, it’s no sin to drink. Please take some. So I can rely upon
      you, Mr. Guard, that there will be no hindrance or unpleasantness for the
      rest of the journey. For you know in moving cattle every hour is precious.
      To-day meat is one price; and to-morrow, look you, it will be another. If
      you are a day or two late and don’t get your price, instead of a
      profit you get home—excuse my saying it—without your breeches.
      Pray take a little.... I rely on you, and as for standing you something or
      what you like, I shall be pleased to show you my respect at any time.”
    

      After having fed the guard, Malahin goes back to the van.
    

      “I have just got hold of the troop train,” he says to his son.
      “We shall go quickly. The guard says if we go all the way with that
      number we shall arrive at eight o’clock to-morrow evening. If one
      does not bestir oneself, my boy, one gets nothing.... That’s so....
      So you watch and learn....”
    

      After the first bell a man with a face black with soot, in a blouse and
      filthy frayed trousers hanging very slack, comes to the door of the van.
      This is the oiler, who had been creeping under the carriages and tapping
      the wheels with a hammer.
    

      “Are these your vans of cattle?” he asks.
    

      “Yes. Why?”
    

      “Why, because two of the vans are not safe. They can’t go on,
      they must stay here to be repaired.”
    

      “Oh, come, tell us another! You simply want a drink, to get
      something out of me.... You should have said so.”
    

      “As you please, only it is my duty to report it at once.”
    

      Without indignation or protest, simply, almost mechanically, the old man
      takes two twenty-kopeck pieces out of his pocket and gives them to the
      oiler. He takes them very calmly, too, and looking good-naturedly at the
      old man enters into conversation.
    

      “You are going to sell your cattle, I suppose.... It’s good
      business!”
    

      Malahin sighs and, looking calmly at the oiler’s black face, tells
      him that trading in cattle used certainly to be profitable, but now it has
      become a risky and losing business.
    

      “I have a mate here,” the oiler interrupts him. “You
      merchant gentlemen might make him a little present....”
    

      Malahin gives something to the mate too. The troop train goes quickly and
      the waits at the stations are comparatively short. The old man is pleased.
      The pleasant impression made by the young man in the rough overcoat has
      gone deep, the vodka he has drunk slightly clouds his brain, the weather
      is magnificent, and everything seems to be going well. He talks without
      ceasing, and at every stopping place runs to the refreshment bar. Feeling
      the need of a listener, he takes with him first the guard, and then the
      engine-driver, and does not simply drink, but makes a long business of it,
      with suitable remarks and cHlinking of glasses.
    

      “You have your job and we have ours,” he says with an affable
      smile. “May God prosper us and you, and not our will but His be
      done.”
    

      The vodka gradually excites him and he is worked up to a great pitch of
      energy. He wants to bestir himself, to fuss about, to make inquiries, to
      talk incessantly. At one minute he fumbles in his pockets and bundles and
      looks for some form. Then he thinks of something and cannot remember it;
      then takes out his pocketbook, and with no sort of object counts over his
      money. He bustles about, sighs and groans, clasps his hands.... Laying out
      before him the letters and telegrams from the meat salesmen in the city,
      bills, post office and telegraphic receipt forms, and his note book, he
      reflects aloud and insists on Yasha’s listening.
    

      And when he is tired of reading over forms and talking about prices, he
      gets out at the stopping places, runs to the vans where his cattle are,
      does nothing, but simply clasps his hands and exclaims in horror.
    

      “Oh, dear! oh, dear!” he says in a complaining voice. “Holy
      Martyr Vlassy! Though they are bullocks, though they are beasts, yet they
      want to eat and drink as men do.... It’s four days and nights since
      they have drunk or eaten. Oh, dear! oh, dear!”
    

      Yasha follows him and does what he is told like an obedient son. He does
      not like the old man’s frequent visits to the refreshment bar.
      Though he is afraid of his father, he cannot refrain from remarking on it.
    

      “So you have begun already!” he says, looking sternly at the
      old man. “What are you rejoicing at? Is it your name-day or what?”
    

      “Don’t you dare teach your father.”
    

      “Fine goings on!”
    

      When he has not to follow his father along the other vans Yasha sits on
      the cape and strums on the accordion. Occasionally he gets out and walks
      lazily beside the train; he stands by the engine and turns a prolonged,
      unmoving stare on the wheels or on the workmen tossing blocks of wood into
      the tender; the hot engine wheezes, the falling blocks come down with the
      mellow, hearty thud of fresh wood; the engine-driver and his assistant,
      very phlegmatic and imperturbable persons, perform incomprehensible
      movements and don’t hurry themselves. After standing for a while by
      the engine, Yasha saunters lazily to the station; here he looks at the
      eatables in the refreshment bar, reads aloud some quite uninteresting
      notice, and goes back slowly to the cattle van. His face expresses neither
      boredom nor desire; apparently he does not care where he is, at home, in
      the van, or by the engine.
    

      Towards evening the train stops near a big station. The lamps have only
      just been lighted along the line; against the blue background in the fresh
      limpid air the lights are bright and pale like stars; they are only red
      and glowing under the station roof, where it is already dark. All the
      lines are loaded up with carriages, and it seems that if another train
      came in there would be no place for it. Yasha runs to the station for
      boiling water to make the evening tea. Well-dressed ladies and high-school
      boys are walking on the platform. If one looks into the distance from the
      platform there are far-away lights twinkling in the evening dusk on both
      sides of the station—that is the town. What town? Yasha does not
      care to know. He sees only the dim lights and wretched buildings beyond
      the station, hears the cabmen shouting, feels a sharp, cold wind on his
      face, and imagines that the town is probably disagreeable, uncomfortable,
      and dull.
    

      While they are having tea, when it is quite dark and a lantern is hanging
      on the wall again as on the previous evening, the train quivers from a
      slight shock and begins moving backwards. After going a little way it
      stops; they hear indistinct shouts, someone sets the chains clanking near
      the buffers and shouts, “Ready!” The train moves and goes
      forward. Ten minutes later it is dragged back again.
    

      Getting out of the van, Malahin does not recognize his train. His eight
      vans of bullocks are standing in the same row with some trolleys which
      were not a part of the train before. Two or three of these are loaded with
      rubble and the others are empty. The guards running to and fro on the
      platform are strangers. They give unwilling and indistinct answers to his
      questions. They have no thoughts to spare for Malahin; they are in a hurry
      to get the train together so as to finish as soon as possible and be back
      in the warmth.
    

      “What number is this?” asks Malahin
    

      “Number eighteen.”
    

      “And where is the troop train? Why have you taken me off the troop
      train?”
    

      Getting no answer, the old man goes to the station. He looks first for the
      familiar figure of the head guard and, not finding him, goes to the
      station-master. The station-master is sitting at a table in his own room,
      turning over a bundle of forms. He is busy, and affects not to see the
      newcomer. His appearance is impressive: a cropped black head, prominent
      ears, a long hooked nose, a swarthy face; he has a forbidding and, as it
      were, offended expression. Malahin begins making his complaint at great
      length.
    

      “What?” queries the station-master. “How is this?”
      He leans against the back of his chair and goes on, growing indignant:
      “What is it? and why shouldn’t you go by number eighteen?
      Speak more clearly, I don’t understand! How is it? Do you want me to
      be everywhere at once?”
    

      He showers questions on him, and for no apparent reason grows sterner and
      sterner. Malahin is already feeling in his pocket for his pocketbook, but
      in the end the station-master, aggrieved and indignant, for some unknown
      reason jumps up from his seat and runs out of the room. Malahin shrugs his
      shoulders, and goes out to look for someone else to speak to.
    

      From boredom or from a desire to put the finishing stroke to a busy day,
      or simply that a window with the inscription “Telegraph!” on
      it catches his eye, he goes to the window and expresses a desire to send
      off a telegram. Taking up a pen, he thinks for a moment, and writes on a
      blue form: “Urgent. Traffic Manager. Eight vans of live stock.
      Delayed at every station. Kindly send an express number. Reply paid.
      Malahin.”
    

      Having sent off the telegram, he goes back to the station-master’s
      room. There he finds, sitting on a sofa covered with gray cloth, a
      benevolent-looking gentleman in spectacles and a cap of raccoon fur; he is
      wearing a peculiar overcoat very much like a lady’s, edged with fur,
      with frogs and slashed sleeves. Another gentleman, dried-up and sinewy,
      wearing the uniform of a railway inspector, stands facing him.
    

      “Just think of it,” says the inspector, addressing the
      gentleman in the queer overcoat. “I’ll tell you an incident
      that really is A1! The Z. railway line in the coolest possible way stole
      three hundred trucks from the N. line. It’s a fact, sir! I swear it!
      They carried them off, repainted them, put their letters on them, and that’s
      all about it. The N. line sends its agents everywhere, they hunt and hunt.
      And then—can you imagine it?—the Company happen to come upon a
      broken-down carriage of the Z. line. They repair it at their depot, and
      all at once, bless my soul! see their own mark on the wheels What do you
      say to that? Eh? If I did it they would send me to Siberia, but the
      railway companies simply snap their fingers at it!”
    

      It is pleasant to Malahin to talk to educated, cultured people. He strokes
      his beard and joins in the conversation with dignity.
    

      “Take this case, gentlemen, for instance,” he says. “I
      am transporting cattle to X. Eight vanloads. Very good.... Now let us say
      they charge me for each vanload as a weight of ten tons; eight bullocks
      don’t weigh ten tons, but much less, yet they don’t take any
      notice of that....”
    

      At that instant Yasha walks into the room looking for his father. He
      listens and is about to sit down on a chair, but probably thinking of his
      weight goes and sits on the window-sill.
    

      “They don’t take any notice of that,” Malahin goes on,
      “and charge me and my son the third-class fare, too, forty-two
      roubles, for going in the van with the bullocks. This is my son Yakov. I
      have two more at home, but they have gone in for study. Well and apart
      from that it is my opinion that the railways have ruined the cattle trade.
      In old days when they drove them in herds it was better.”
    

      The old man’s talk is lengthy and drawn out. After every sentence he
      looks at Yasha as though he would say: “See how I am talking to
      clever people.”
    

      “Upon my word!” the inspector interrupts him. “No one is
      indignant, no one criticizes. And why? It is very simple. An abomination
      strikes the eye and arouses indignation only when it is exceptional, when
      the established order is broken by it. Here, where, saving your presence,
      it constitutes the long-established program and forms and enters into the
      basis of the order itself, where every sleeper on the line bears the trace
      of it and stinks of it, one too easily grows accustomed to it! Yes, sir!”
    

      The second bell rings, the gentlemen in the queer overcoat gets up. The
      inspector takes him by the arm and, still talking with heat, goes off with
      him to the platform. After the third bell the station-master runs into his
      room, and sits down at his table.
    

      “Listen, with what number am I to go?” asks Malahin.
    

      The station-master looks at a form and says indignantly:
    

      “Are you Malahin, eight vanloads? You must pay a rouble a van and
      six roubles and twenty kopecks for stamps. You have no stamps. Total,
      fourteen roubles, twenty kopecks.”
    

      Receiving the money, he writes something down, dries it with sand, and,
      hurriedly snatching up a bundle of forms, goes quickly out of the room.
    

      At ten o’clock in the evening Malahin gets an answer from the
      traffic manager: “Give precedence.”
    

      Reading the telegram through, the old man winks significantly and, very
      well pleased with himself, puts it in his pocket.
    

      “Here,” he says to Yasha, “look and learn.”
    

      At midnight his train goes on. The night is dark and cold like the
      previous one; the waits at the stations are long. Yasha sits on the cape
      and imperturbably strums on the accordion, while the old man is still more
      eager to exert himself. At one of the stations he is overtaken by a desire
      to lodge a complaint. At his request a gendarme sits down and writes:
    

      “November 10, 188-.—I, non-commissioned officer of the Z.
      section of the N. police department of railways, Ilya Tchered, in
      accordance with article II of the statute of May 19, 1871, have drawn up
      this protocol at the station of X. as herewith follows.... ”
    

      “What am I to write next?” asks the gendarme.
    

      Malahin lays out before him forms, postal and telegraph receipts,
      accounts.... He does not know himself definitely what he wants of the
      gendarme; he wants to describe in the protocol not any separate episode
      but his whole journey, with all his losses and conversations with
      station-masters—to describe it lengthily and vindictively.
    

      “At the station of Z.,” he says, “write that the
      station-master unHlinked my vans from the troop train because he did not
      like my countenance.”
    

      And he wants the gendarme to be sure to mention his countenance. The
      latter listens wearily, and goes on writing without hearing him to the
      end. He ends his protocol thus:
    

      “The above deposition I, non-commissioned officer Tchered, have
      written down in this protocol with a view to present it to the head of the
      Z. section, and have handed a copy thereof to Gavril Malahin.”
    

      The old man takes the copy, adds it to the papers with which his side
      pocket is stuffed, and, much pleased, goes back to his van.
    

      In the morning Malahin wakes up again in a bad humor, but his wrath vents
      itself not on Yasha but the cattle.
    

      “The cattle are done for!” he grumbles. “They are done
      for! They are at the last gasp! God be my judge! they will all die. Tfoo!”
    

      The bullocks, who have had nothing to drink for many days, tortured by
      thirst, are licking the hoar frost on the walls, and when Malachin goes up
      to them they begin licking his cold fur jacket. From their clear, tearful
      eyes it can be seen that they are exhausted by thirst and the jolting of
      the train, that they are hungry and miserable.
    

      “It’s a nice job taking you by rail, you wretched brutes!”
      mutters Malahin. “I could wish you were dead to get it over! It
      makes me sick to look at you!”
    

      At midday the train stops at a big station where, according to the
      regulations, there was drinking water provided for cattle.
    

      Water is given to the cattle, but the bullocks will not drink it: the
      water is too cold....
    


      Two more days and nights pass, and at last in the distance in the murky
      fog the city comes into sight. The journey is over. The train comes to a
      standstill before reaching the town, near a goods’ station. The
      bullocks, released from the van, stagger and stumble as though they were
      walking on slippery ice.
    

      Having got through the unloading and veterinary inspection, Malahin and
      Yasha take up their quarters in a dirty, cheap hotel in the outskirts of
      the town, in the square in which the cattle-market is held. Their lodgings
      are filthy and their food is disgusting, unlike what they ever have at
      home; they sleep to the harsh strains of a wretched steam hurdy-gurdy
      which plays day and night in the restaurant under their lodging.
    

      The old man spends his time from morning till night going about looking
      for purchasers, and Yasha sits for days in the hotel room, or goes out
      into the street to look at the town. He sees the filthy square heaped up
      with dung, the signboards of restaurants, the turreted walls of a
      monastery in the fog. Sometimes he runs across the street and looks into
      the grocer’s shop, admires the jars of cakes of different colors,
      yawns, and lazily saunters back to his room. The city does not interest
      him.
    

      At last the bullocks are sold to a dealer. Malahin hires drovers. The
      cattle are divided into herds, ten in each, and driven to the other end of
      the town. The bullocks, exhausted, go with drooping heads through the
      noisy streets, and look indifferently at what they see for the first and
      last time in their lives. The tattered drovers walk after them, their
      heads drooping too. They are bored.... Now and then some drover starts out
      of his brooding, remembers that there are cattle in front of him intrusted
      to his charge, and to show that he is doing his duty brings a stick down
      full swing on a bullock’s back. The bullock staggers with the pain,
      runs forward a dozen paces, and looks about him as though he were ashamed
      at being beaten before people.
    

      After selling the bullocks and buying for his family presents such as they
      could perfectly well have bought at home, Malahin and Yasha get ready for
      their journey back. Three hours before the train goes the old man, who has
      already had a drop too much with the purchaser and so is fussy, goes down
      with Yasha to the restaurant and sits down to drink tea. Like all
      provincials, he cannot eat and drink alone: he must have company as fussy
      and as fond of sedate conversation as himself.
    

      “Call the host!” he says to the waiter; “tell him I
      should like to entertain him.”
    

      The hotel-keeper, a well-fed man, absolutely indifferent to his lodgers,
      comes and sits down to the table.
    

      “Well, we have sold our stock,” Malahin says, laughing.
      “I have swapped my goat for a hawk. Why, when we set off the price
      of meat was three roubles ninety kopecks, but when we arrived it had
      dropped to three roubles twenty-five. They tell us we are too late, we
      should have been here three days earlier, for now there is not the same
      demand for meat, St. Philip’s fast has come.... Eh? It’s a
      nice how-do-you-do! It meant a loss of fourteen roubles on each bullock.
      Yes. But only think what it costs to bring the stock! Fifteen roubles
      carriage, and you must put down six roubles for each bullock, tips,
      bribes, drinks, and one thing and another....”
    

      The hotel-keeper listens out of politeness and reluctantly drinks tea.
      Malahin sighs and groans, gesticulates, jests about his ill-luck, but
      everything shows that the loss he has sustained does not trouble him much.
      He doesn’t mind whether he has lost or gained as long as he has
      listeners, has something to make a fuss about, and is not late for his
      train.
    

      An hour later Malahin and Yasha, laden with bags and boxes, go downstairs
      from the hotel room to the front door to get into a sledge and drive to
      the station. They are seen off by the hotel-keeper, the waiter, and
      various women. The old man is touched. He thrusts ten-kopeck pieces in all
      directions, and says in a sing-song voice:
    

      “Good by, good health to you! God grant that all may be well with
      you. Please God if we are alive and well we shall come again in Lent.
      Good-by. Thank you. God bless you!”
    

      Getting into the sledge, the old man spends a long time crossing himself
      in the direction in which the monastery walls make a patch of darkness in
      the fog. Yasha sits beside him on the very edge of the seat with his legs
      hanging over the side. His face as before shows no sign of emotion and
      expresses neither boredom nor desire. He is not glad that he is going
      home, nor sorry that he has not had time to see the sights of the city.
    

      “Drive on!”
    

      The cabman whips up the horse and, turning round, begins swearing at the
      heavy and cumbersome luggage.
    

* On many railway lines, in order to avoid accidents, it is
against the regulations to carry hay on the trains, and so
live stock are without fodder on the journey.—Author’s
Note.

**The train destined especially for the transport of troops
is called the troop train; when there are no troops it takes
goods, and goes more rapidly than ordinary goods train.
—Author’s Note.








      SORROW
    

THE turner, Grigory
      Petrov, who had been known for years past as a splendid craftsman, and at
      the same time as the most senseless peasant in the Galtchinskoy district,
      was taking his old woman to the hospital. He had to drive over twenty
      miles, and it was an awful road. A government post driver could hardly
      have coped with it, much less an incompetent sluggard like Grigory. A
      cutting cold wind was blowing straight in his face. Clouds of snowflakes
      were whirling round and round in all directions, so that one could not
      tell whether the snow was falling from the sky or rising from the earth.
      The fields, the telegraph posts, and the forest could not be seen for the
      fog of snow. And when a particularly violent gust of wind swooped down on
      Grigory, even the yoke above the horse’s head could not be seen. The
      wretched, feeble little nag crawled slowly along. It took all its strength
      to drag its legs out of the snow and to tug with its head. The turner was
      in a hurry. He kept restlessly hopping up and down on the front seat and
      lashing the horse’s back.
    

      “Don’t cry, Matryona,...” he muttered. “Have a
      little patience. Please God we shall reach the hospital, and in a trice it
      will be the right thing for you.... Pavel Ivanitch will give you some
      little drops, or tell them to bleed you; or maybe his honor will be
      pleased to rub you with some sort of spirit—it’ll... draw it
      out of your side. Pavel Ivanitch will do his best. He will shout and stamp
      about, but he will do his best.... He is a nice gentleman, affable, God
      give him health! As soon as we get there he will dart out of his room and
      will begin calling me names. ‘How? Why so?’ he will cry.
      ‘Why did you not come at the right time? I am not a dog to be
      hanging about waiting on you devils all day. Why did you not come in the
      morning? Go away! Get out of my sight. Come again to-morrow.’ And I
      shall say: ‘Mr. Doctor! Pavel Ivanitch! Your honor!’ Get on,
      do! plague take you, you devil! Get on!”
    

      The turner lashed his nag, and without looking at the old woman went on
      muttering to himself:
    

      “‘Your honor! It’s true as before God.... Here’s
      the Cross for you, I set off almost before it was light. How could I be
      here in time if the Lord.... The Mother of God... is wroth, and has sent
      such a snowstorm? Kindly look for yourself.... Even a first-rate horse
      could not do it, while mine—you can see for yourself—is not a
      horse but a disgrace.’ And Pavel Ivanitch will frown and shout:
      ‘We know you! You always find some excuse! Especially you, Grishka;
      I know you of old! I’ll be bound you have stopped at half a dozen
      taverns!’ And I shall say: ‘Your honor! am I a criminal or a
      heathen? My old woman is giving up her soul to God, she is dying, and am I
      going to run from tavern to tavern! What an idea, upon my word! Plague
      take them, the taverns!’ Then Pavel Ivanitch will order you to be
      taken into the hospital, and I shall fall at his feet.... ‘Pavel
      Ivanitch! Your honor, we thank you most humbly! Forgive us fools and
      anathemas, don’t be hard on us peasants! We deserve a good kicking,
      while you graciously put yourself out and mess your feet in the snow!’
      And Pavel Ivanitch will give me a look as though he would like to hit me,
      and will say: ‘You’d much better not be swilling vodka, you
      fool, but taking pity on your old woman instead of falling at my feet. You
      want a thrashing!’ ‘You are right there—a thrashing,
      Pavel Ivanitch, strike me God! But how can we help bowing down at your
      feet if you are our benefactor, and a real father to us? Your honor! I
      give you my word,... here as before God,... you may spit in my face if I
      deceive you: as soon as my Matryona, this same here, is well again and
      restored to her natural condition, I’ll make anything for your honor
      that you would like to order! A cigarette-case, if you like, of the best
      birchwood,... balls for croquet, skittles of the most foreign pattern I
      can turn.... I will make anything for you! I won’t take a farthing
      from you. In Moscow they would charge you four roubles for such a
      cigarette-case, but I won’t take a farthing.’ The doctor will
      laugh and say: ‘Oh, all right, all right.... I see! But it’s a
      pity you are a drunkard....’ I know how to manage the gentry, old
      girl. There isn’t a gentleman I couldn’t talk to. Only God
      grant we don’t get off the road. Oh, how it is blowing! One’s
      eyes are full of snow.”
    

      And the turner went on muttering endlessly. He prattled on mechanically to
      get a little relief from his depressing feelings. He had plenty of words
      on his tongue, but the thoughts and questions in his brain were even more
      numerous. Sorrow had come upon the turner unawares, unlooked-for, and
      unexpected, and now he could not get over it, could not recover himself.
      He had lived hitherto in unruffled calm, as though in drunken
      half-consciousness, knowing neither grief nor joy, and now he was suddenly
      aware of a dreadful pain in his heart. The careless idler and drunkard
      found himself quite suddenly in the position of a busy man, weighed down
      by anxieties and haste, and even struggling with nature.
    

      The turner remembered that his trouble had begun the evening before. When
      he had come home yesterday evening, a little drunk as usual, and from
      long-established habit had begun swearing and shaking his fists, his old
      woman had looked at her rowdy spouse as she had never looked at him
      before. Usually, the expression in her aged eyes was that of a martyr,
      meek like that of a dog frequently beaten and badly fed; this time she had
      looked at him sternly and immovably, as saints in the holy pictures or
      dying people look. From that strange, evil look in her eyes the trouble
      had begun. The turner, stupefied with amazement, borrowed a horse from a
      neighbor, and now was taking his old woman to the hospital in the hope
      that, by means of powders and ointments, Pavel Ivanitch would bring back
      his old woman’s habitual expression.
    

      “I say, Matryona,...” the turner muttered, “if Pavel
      Ivanitch asks you whether I beat you, say, ‘Never!’ and I
      never will beat you again. I swear it. And did I ever beat you out of
      spite? I just beat you without thinking. I am sorry for you. Some men
      wouldn’t trouble, but here I am taking you.... I am doing my best.
      And the way it snows, the way it snows! Thy Will be done, O Lord! God
      grant we don’t get off the road.... Does your side ache, Matryona,
      that you don’t speak? I ask you, does your side ache?”
    

      It struck him as strange that the snow on his old woman’s face was
      not melting; it was queer that the face itself looked somehow drawn, and
      had turned a pale gray, dingy waxen hue and had grown grave and solemn.
    

      “You are a fool!” muttered the turner.... “I tell you on
      my conscience, before God,... and you go and... Well, you are a fool! I
      have a good mind not to take you to Pavel Ivanitch!”
    

      The turner let the reins go and began thinking. He could not bring himself
      to look round at his old woman: he was frightened. He was afraid, too, of
      asking her a question and not getting an answer. At last, to make an end
      of uncertainty, without looking round he felt his old woman’s cold
      hand. The lifted hand fell like a log.
    

      “She is dead, then! What a business!”
    

      And the turner cried. He was not so much sorry as annoyed. He thought how
      quickly everything passes in this world! His trouble had hardly begun when
      the final catastrophe had happened. He had not had time to live with his
      old woman, to show her he was sorry for her before she died. He had lived
      with her for forty years, but those forty years had passed by as it were
      in a fog. What with drunkenness, quarreling, and poverty, there had been
      no feeling of life. And, as though to spite him, his old woman died at the
      very time when he felt he was sorry for her, that he could not live
      without her, and that he had behaved dreadfully badly to her.
    

      “Why, she used to go the round of the village,” he remembered.
      “I sent her out myself to beg for bread. What a business! She ought
      to have lived another ten years, the silly thing; as it is I’ll be
      bound she thinks I really was that sort of man.... Holy Mother! but where
      the devil am I driving? There’s no need for a doctor now, but a
      burial. Turn back!”
    

      Grigory turned back and lashed the horse with all his might. The road grew
      worse and worse every hour. Now he could not see the yoke at all. Now and
      then the sledge ran into a young fir tree, a dark object scratched the
      turner’s hands and flashed before his eyes, and the field of vision
      was white and whirling again.
    

      “To live over again,” thought the turner.
    

      He remembered that forty years ago Matryona had been young, handsome,
      merry, that she had come of a well-to-do family. They had married her to
      him because they had been attracted by his handicraft. All the essentials
      for a happy life had been there, but the trouble was that, just as he had
      got drunk after the wedding and lay sprawling on the stove, so he had gone
      on without waking up till now. His wedding he remembered, but of what
      happened after the wedding—for the life of him he could remember
      nothing, except perhaps that he had drunk, lain on the stove, and
      quarreled. Forty years had been wasted like that.
    

      The white clouds of snow were beginning little by little to turn gray. It
      was getting dusk.
    

      “Where am I going?” the turner suddenly bethought him with a
      start. “I ought to be thinking of the burial, and I am on the way to
      the hospital.... It as is though I had gone crazy.”
    

      Grigory turned round again, and again lashed his horse. The little nag
      strained its utmost and, with a snort, fell into a little trot. The turner
      lashed it on the back time after time.... A knocking was audible behind
      him, and though he did not look round, he knew it was the dead woman’s
      head knocking against the sledge. And the snow kept turning darker and
      darker, the wind grew colder and more cutting....
    

      “To live over again!” thought the turner. “I should get
      a new lathe, take orders,... give the money to my old woman....”
    

      And then he dropped the reins. He looked for them, tried to pick them up,
      but could not—his hands would not work....
    

      “It does not matter,” he thought, “the horse will go of
      itself, it knows the way. I might have a little sleep now.... Before the
      funeral or the requiem it would be as well to get a little rest....”
    

      The turner closed his eyes and dozed. A little later he heard the horse
      stop; he opened his eyes and saw before him something dark like a hut or a
      haystack....
    

      He would have got out of the sledge and found out what it was, but he felt
      overcome by such inertia that it seemed better to freeze than move, and he
      sank into a peaceful sleep.
    

      He woke up in a big room with painted walls. Bright sunlight was streaming
      in at the windows. The turner saw people facing him, and his first feeling
      was a desire to show himself a respectable man who knew how things should
      be done.
    

      “A requiem, brothers, for my old woman,” he said. “The
      priest should be told....”
    

      “Oh, all right, all right; lie down,” a voice cut him short.
    

      “Pavel Ivanitch!” the turner cried in surprise, seeing the
      doctor before him. “Your honor, benefactor!”
    

      He wanted to leap up and fall on his knees before the doctor, but felt
      that his arms and legs would not obey him.
    

      “Your honor, where are my legs, where are my arms!”
    

      “Say good-by to your arms and legs.... They’ve been frozen
      off. Come, come!... What are you crying for? You’ve lived your life,
      and thank God for it! I suppose you have had sixty years of it—that’s
      enough for you!...”
    

      “I am grieving.... Graciously forgive me! If I could have another
      five or six years!...”
    

      “What for?”
    

      “The horse isn’t mine, I must give it back.... I must bury my
      old woman.... How quickly it is all ended in this world! Your honor, Pavel
      Ivanitch! A cigarette-case of birchwood of the best! I’ll turn you
      croquet balls....”
    

      The doctor went out of the ward with a wave of his hand. It was all over
      with the turner.
    







      ON OFFICIAL DUTY
    

THE deputy
      examining magistrate and the district doctor were going to an inquest in
      the village of Syrnya. On the road they were overtaken by a snowstorm;
      they spent a long time going round and round, and arrived, not at midday,
      as they had intended, but in the evening when it was dark. They put up for
      the night at the Zemstvo hut. It so happened that it was in this hut that
      the dead body was lying—the corpse of the Zemstvo insurance agent,
      Lesnitsky, who had arrived in Syrnya three days before and, ordering the
      samovar in the hut, had shot himself, to the great surprise of everyone;
      and the fact that he had ended his life so strangely, after unpacking his
      eatables and laying them out on the table, and with the samovar before
      him, led many people to suspect that it was a case of murder; an inquest
      was necessary.
    

      In the outer room the doctor and the examining magistrate shook the snow
      off themselves and knocked it off their boots. And meanwhile the old
      village constable, Ilya Loshadin, stood by, holding a little tin lamp.
      There was a strong smell of paraffin.
    

      “Who are you?” asked the doctor.
    

      “Conshtable,...” answered the constable.
    

      He used to spell it “conshtable” when he signed the receipts
      at the post office.
    

      “And where are the witnesses?”
    

      “They must have gone to tea, your honor.”
    

      On the right was the parlor, the travelers’ or gentry’s room;
      on the left the kitchen, with a big stove and sleeping shelves under the
      rafters. The doctor and the examining magistrate, followed by the
      constable, holding the lamp high above his head, went into the parlor.
      Here a still, long body covered with white linen was lying on the floor
      close to the table-legs. In the dim light of the lamp they could clearly
      see, besides the white covering, new rubber goloshes, and everything about
      it was uncanny and sinister: the dark walls, and the silence, and the
      goloshes, and the stillness of the dead body. On the table stood a
      samovar, cold long ago; and round it parcels, probably the eatables.
    

      “To shoot oneself in the Zemstvo hut, how tactless!” said the
      doctor. “If one does want to put a bullet through one’s
      brains, one ought to do it at home in some outhouse.”
    

      He sank on to a bench, just as he was, in his cap, his fur coat, and his
      felt overboots; his fellow-traveler, the examining magistrate, sat down
      opposite.
    

      “These hysterical, neurasthenic people are great egoists,” the
      doctor went on hotly. “If a neurasthenic sleeps in the same room
      with you, he rustles his newspaper; when he dines with you, he gets up a
      scene with his wife without troubling about your presence; and when he
      feels inclined to shoot himself, he shoots himself in a village in a
      Zemstvo hut, so as to give the maximum of trouble to everybody. These
      gentlemen in every circumstance of life think of no one but themselves!
      That’s why the elderly so dislike our ‘nervous age.’”
    

      “The elderly dislike so many things,” said the examining
      magistrate, yawning. “You should point out to the elder generation
      what the difference is between the suicides of the past and the suicides
      of to-day. In the old days the so-called gentleman shot himself because he
      had made away with Government money, but nowadays it is because he is sick
      of life, depressed.... Which is better?”
    

      “Sick of life, depressed; but you must admit that he might have shot
      himself somewhere else.”
    

      “Such trouble!” said the constable, “such trouble! It’s
      a real affliction. The people are very much upset, your honor; they haven’t
      slept these three nights. The children are crying. The cows ought to be
      milked, but the women won’t go to the stall—they are afraid...
      for fear the gentleman should appear to them in the darkness. Of course
      they are silly women, but some of the men are frightened too. As soon as
      it is dark they won’t go by the hut one by one, but only in a flock
      together. And the witnesses too....”
    

      Dr. Startchenko, a middle-aged man in spectacles with a dark beard, and
      the examining magistrate Lyzhin, a fair man, still young, who had only
      taken his degree two years before and looked more like a student than an
      official, sat in silence, musing. They were vexed that they were late. Now
      they had to wait till morning, and to stay here for the night, though it
      was not yet six o’clock; and they had before them a long evening, a
      dark night, boredom, uncomfortable beds, beetles, and cold in the morning;
      and listening to the blizzard that howled in the chimney and in the loft,
      they both thought how unlike all this was the life which they would have
      chosen for themselves and of which they had once dreamed, and how far away
      they both were from their contemporaries, who were at that moment walking
      about the lighted streets in town without noticing the weather, or were
      getting ready for the theatre, or sitting in their studies over a book.
      Oh, how much they would have given now only to stroll along the Nevsky
      Prospect, or along Petrovka in Moscow, to listen to decent singing, to sit
      for an hour or so in a restaurant!
    

      “Oo-oo-oo-oo!” sang the storm in the loft, and something
      outside slammed viciously, probably the signboard on the hut. “Oo-oo-oo-oo!”
    

      “You can do as you please, but I have no desire to stay here,”
      said Startchenko, getting up. “It’s not six yet, it’s
      too early to go to bed; I am off. Von Taunitz lives not far from here,
      only a couple of miles from Syrnya. I shall go to see him and spend the
      evening there. Constable, run and tell my coachman not to take the horses
      out. And what are you going to do?” he asked Lyzhin.
    

      “I don’t know; I expect I shall go to sleep.”
    

      The doctor wrapped himself in his fur coat and went out. Lyzhin could hear
      him talking to the coachman and the bells beginning to quiver on the
      frozen horses. He drove off.
    

      “It is not nice for you, sir, to spend the night in here,”
      said the constable; “come into the other room. It’s dirty, but
      for one night it won’t matter. I’ll get a samovar from a
      peasant and heat it directly. I’ll heap up some hay for you, and
      then you go to sleep, and God bless you, your honor.”
    

      A little later the examining magistrate was sitting in the kitchen
      drinking tea, while Loshadin, the constable, was standing at the door
      talking. He was an old man about sixty, short and very thin, bent and
      white, with a naive smile on his face and watery eyes, and he kept
      smacking with his lips as though he were sucking a sweetmeat. He was
      wearing a short sheepskin coat and high felt boots, and held his stick in
      his hands all the time. The youth of the examining magistrate aroused his
      compassion, and that was probably why he addressed him familiarly.
    

      “The elder gave orders that he was to be informed when the police
      superintendent or the examining magistrate came,” he said, “so
      I suppose I must go now.... It’s nearly three miles to the volost,
      and the storm, the snowdrifts, are something terrible—maybe one won’t
      get there before midnight. Ough! how the wind roars!”
    

      “I don’t need the elder,” said Lyzhin. “There is
      nothing for him to do here.”
    

      He looked at the old man with curiosity, and asked:
    

      “Tell me, grandfather, how many years have you been constable?”
    

      “How many? Why, thirty years. Five years after the Freedom I began
      going as constable, that’s how I reckon it. And from that time I
      have been going every day since. Other people have holidays, but I am
      always going. When it’s Easter and the church bells are ringing and
      Christ has risen, I still go about with my bag—to the treasury, to
      the post, to the police superintendent’s lodgings, to the rural
      captain, to the tax inspector, to the municipal office, to the gentry, to
      the peasants, to all orthodox Christians. I carry parcels, notices, tax
      papers, letters, forms of different sorts, circulars, and to be sure, kind
      gentleman, there are all sorts of forms nowadays, so as to note down the
      numbers—yellow, white, and red—and every gentleman or priest
      or well-to-do peasant must write down a dozen times in the year how much
      he has sown and harvested, how many quarters or poods he has of rye, how
      many of oats, how many of hay, and what the weather’s like, you
      know, and insects, too, of all sorts. To be sure you can write what you
      like, it’s only a regulation, but one must go and give out the
      notices and then go again and collect them. Here, for instance, there’s
      no need to cut open the gentleman; you know yourself it’s a silly
      thing, it’s only dirtying your hands, and here you have been put to
      trouble, your honor; you have come because it’s the regulation; you
      can’t help it. For thirty years I have been going round according to
      regulation. In the summer it is all right, it is warm and dry; but in
      winter and autumn it’s uncomfortable. At times I have been almost
      drowned and almost frozen; all sorts of things have happened—wicked
      people set on me in the forest and took away my bag; I have been beaten,
      and I have been before a court of law.”
    

      “What were you accused of?”
    

      “Of fraud.”
    

      “How do you mean?”
    

      “Why, you see, Hrisanf Grigoryev, the clerk, sold the contractor
      some boards belonging to someone else—cheated him, in fact. I was
      mixed up in it. They sent me to the tavern for vodka; well, the clerk did
      not share with me—did not even offer me a glass; but as through my
      poverty I was—in appearance, I mean—not a man to be relied
      upon, not a man of any worth, we were both brought to trial; he was sent
      to prison, but, praise God! I was acquitted on all points. They read a
      notice, you know, in the court. And they were all in uniforms—in the
      court, I mean. I can tell you, your honor, my duties for anyone not used
      to them are terrible, absolutely killing; but to me it is nothing. In
      fact, my feet ache when I am not walking. And at home it is worse for me.
      At home one has to heat the stove for the clerk in the volost
      office, to fetch water for him, to clean his boots.”
    

      “And what wages do you get?” Lyzhin asked.
    

      “Eighty-four roubles a year.”
    

      “I’ll bet you get other little sums coming in. You do, don’t
      you?”
    

      “Other little sums? No, indeed! Gentlemen nowadays don’t often
      give tips. Gentlemen nowadays are strict, they take offense at anything.
      If you bring them a notice they are offended, if you take off your cap
      before them they are offended. ‘You have come to the wrong entrance,’
      they say. ‘You are a drunkard,’ they say. ‘You smell of
      onion; you are a blockhead; you are the son of a bitch.’ There are
      kind-hearted ones, of course; but what does one get from them? They only
      laugh and call one all sorts of names. Mr. Altuhin, for instance, he is a
      good-natured gentleman; and if you look at him he seems sober and in his
      right mind, but so soon as he sees me he shouts and does not know what he
      means himself. He gave me such a name ‘You,’ said he,...”
      The constable uttered some word, but in such a low voice that it was
      impossible to make out what he said.
    

      “What?” Lyzhin asked. “Say it again.”
    

      “‘Administration,’” the constable repeated aloud.
      “He has been calling me that for a long while, for the last six
      years. ‘Hullo, Administration!’ But I don’t mind; let
      him, God bless him! Sometimes a lady will send one a glass of vodka and a
      bit of pie and one drinks to her health. But peasants give more; peasants
      are more kind-hearted, they have the fear of God in their hearts: one will
      give a bit of bread, another a drop of cabbage soup, another will stand
      one a glass. The village elders treat one to tea in the tavern. Here the
      witnesses have gone to their tea. ‘Loshadin,’ they said,
      ‘you stay here and keep watch for us,’ and they gave me a
      kopeck each. You see, they are frightened, not being used to it, and
      yesterday they gave me fifteen kopecks and offered me a glass.”
    

      “And you, aren’t you frightened?”
    

      “I am, sir; but of course it is my duty, there is no getting away
      from it. In the summer I was taking a convict to the town, and he set upon
      me and gave me such a drubbing! And all around were fields, forest—how
      could I get away from him? It’s just the same here. I remember the
      gentleman, Mr. Lesnitsky, when he was so high, and I knew his father and
      mother. I am from the village of Nedoshtchotova, and they, the Lesnitsky
      family, were not more than three-quarters of a mile from us and less than
      that, their ground next to ours, and Mr. Lesnitsky had a sister, a
      God-fearing and tender-hearted lady. Lord keep the soul of Thy servant
      Yulya, eternal memory to her! She was never married, and when she was
      dying she divided all her property; she left three hundred acres to the
      monastery, and six hundred to the commune of peasants of Nedoshtchotova to
      commemorate her soul; but her brother hid the will, they do say burnt it
      in the stove, and took all this land for himself. He thought, to be sure,
      it was for his benefit; but—nay, wait a bit, you won’t get on
      in the world through injustice, brother. The gentleman did not go to
      confession for twenty years after. He kept away from the church, to be
      sure, and died impenitent. He burst. He was a very fat man, so he burst
      lengthways. Then everything was taken from the young master, from
      Seryozha, to pay the debts—everything there was. Well, he had not
      gone very far in his studies, he couldn’t do anything, and the
      president of the Rural Board, his uncle—‘I’ll take him’—Seryozha,
      I mean—thinks he, ‘for an agent; let him collect the
      insurance, that’s not a difficult job,’ and the gentleman was
      young and proud, he wanted to be living on a bigger scale and in better
      style and with more freedom. To be sure it was a come-down for him to be
      jolting about the district in a wretched cart and talking to the peasants;
      he would walk and keep looking on the ground, looking on the ground and
      saying nothing; if you called his name right in his ear, ‘Sergey
      Sergeyitch!’ he would look round like this, ‘Eh?’ and
      look down on the ground again, and now you see he has laid hands on
      himself. There’s no sense in it, your honor, it’s not right,
      and there’s no making out what’s the meaning of it, merciful
      Lord! Say your father was rich and you are poor; it is mortifying, there’s
      no doubt about it, but there, you must make up your mind to it. I used to
      live in good style, too; I had two horses, your honor, three cows, I used
      to keep twenty head of sheep; but the time has come, and I am left with
      nothing but a wretched bag, and even that is not mine but Government
      property. And now in our Nedoshtchotova, if the truth is to be told, my
      house is the worst of the lot. Makey had four footmen, and now Makey is a
      footman himself. Petrak had four laborers, and now Petrak is a laborer
      himself.”
    

      “How was it you became poor?” asked the examining magistrate.
    

      “My sons drink terribly. I could not tell you how they drink, you
      wouldn’t believe it.”
    

      Lyzhin listened and thought how he, Lyzhin, would go back sooner or later
      to Moscow, while this old man would stay here for ever, and would always
      be walking and walking. And how many times in his life he would come
      across such battered, unkempt old men, not “men of any worth,”
      in whose souls fifteen kopecks, glasses of vodka, and a profound belief
      that you can’t get on in this life by dishonesty, were equally
      firmly rooted.
    

      Then he grew tired of listening, and told the old man to bring him some
      hay for his bed, There was an iron bedstead with a pillow and a quilt in
      the traveler’s room, and it could be fetched in; but the dead man
      had been lying by it for nearly three days (and perhaps sitting on it just
      before his death), and it would be disagreeable to sleep upon it now....
    

      “It’s only half-past seven,” thought Lyzhin, glancing at
      his watch. “How awful it is!”
    

      He was not sleepy, but having nothing to do to pass away the time, he lay
      down and covered himself with a rug. Loshadin went in and out several
      times, clearing away the tea-things; smacking his lips and sighing, he
      kept tramping round the table; at last he took his little lamp and went
      out, and, looking at his long, gray-headed, bent figure from behind,
      Lyzhin thought:
    

      “Just like a magician in an opera.”
    

      It was dark. The moon must have been behind the clouds, as the windows and
      the snow on the window-frames could be seen distinctly.
    

      “Oo-oo-oo!” sang the storm, “Oo-oo-oo-oo!”
    

      “Ho-ho-ly sa-aints!” wailed a woman in the loft, or it sounded
      like it. “Ho-ho-ly sa-aints!”
    

      “B-booh!” something outside banged against the wall. “Trah!”
    

      The examining magistrate listened: there was no woman up there, it was the
      wind howling. It was rather cold, and he put his fur coat over his rug. As
      he got warm he thought how remote all this—the storm, and the hut,
      and the old man, and the dead body lying in the next room—how remote
      it all was from the life he desired for himself, and how alien it all was
      to him, how petty, how uninteresting. If this man had killed himself in
      Moscow or somewhere in the neighborhood, and he had had to hold an inquest
      on him there, it would have been interesting, important, and perhaps he
      might even have been afraid to sleep in the next room to the corpse. Here,
      nearly a thousand miles from Moscow, all this was seen somehow in a
      different light; it was not life, they were not human beings, but
      something only existing “according to the regulation,” as
      Loshadin said; it would leave not the faintest trace in the memory, and
      would be forgotten as soon as he, Lyzhin, drove away from Syrnya. The
      fatherland, the real Russia, was Moscow, Petersburg; but here he was in
      the provinces, the colonies. When one dreamed of playing a leading part,
      of becoming a popular figure, of being, for instance, examining magistrate
      in particularly important cases or prosecutor in a circuit court, of being
      a society lion, one always thought of Moscow. To live, one must be in
      Moscow; here one cared for nothing, one grew easily resigned to one’s
      insignificant position, and only expected one thing of life—to get
      away quickly, quickly. And Lyzhin mentally moved about the Moscow streets,
      went into the familiar houses, met his kindred, his comrades, and there
      was a sweet pang at his heart at the thought that he was only twenty-six,
      and that if in five or ten years he could break away from here and get to
      Moscow, even then it would not be too late and he would still have a whole
      life before him. And as he sank into unconsciousness, as his thoughts
      began to be confused, he imagined the long corridor of the court at
      Moscow, himself delivering a speech, his sisters, the orchestra which for
      some reason kept droning: “Oo-oo-oo-oo! Oo-oooo-oo!”
    

      “Booh! Trah!” sounded again. “Booh!”
    

      And he suddenly recalled how one day, when he was talking to the
      bookkeeper in the little office of the Rural Board, a thin, pale gentleman
      with black hair and dark eyes walked in; he had a disagreeable look in his
      eyes such as one sees in people who have slept too long after dinner, and
      it spoilt his delicate, intelligent profile; and the high boots he was
      wearing did not suit him, but looked clumsy. The bookkeeper had introduced
      him: “This is our insurance agent.”
    

      “So that was Lesnitsky,... this same man,” Lyzhin reflected
      now.
    

      He recalled Lesnitsky’s soft voice, imagined his gait, and it seemed
      to him that someone was walking beside him now with a step like Lesnitsky’s.
    

      All at once he felt frightened, his head turned cold.
    

      “Who’s there?” he asked in alarm.
    

      “The conshtable!”
    

      “What do you want here?”
    

      “I have come to ask, your honor—you said this evening that you
      did not want the elder, but I am afraid he may be angry. He told me to go
      to him. Shouldn’t I go?”
    

      “That’s enough, you bother me,” said Lyzhin with
      vexation, and he covered himself up again.
    

      “He may be angry.... I’ll go, your honor. I hope you will be
      comfortable,” and Loshadin went out.
    

      In the passage there was coughing and subdued voices. The witnesses must
      have returned.
    

      “We’ll let those poor beggars get away early to-morrow,...”
      thought the examining magistrate; “we’ll begin the inquest as
      soon as it is daylight.”
    

      He began sinking into forgetfulness when suddenly there were steps again,
      not timid this time but rapid and noisy. There was the slam of a door,
      voices, the scratching of a match....
    

      “Are you asleep? Are you asleep?” Dr. Startchenko was asking
      him hurriedly and angrily as he struck one match after another; he was
      covered with snow, and brought a chill air in with him. “Are you
      asleep? Get up! Let us go to Von Taunitz’s. He has sent his own
      horses for you. Come along. There, at any rate, you will have supper, and
      sleep like a human being. You see I have come for you myself. The horses
      are splendid, we shall get there in twenty minutes.”
    

      “And what time is it now?”
    

      “A quarter past ten.”
    

      Lyzhin, sleepy and discontented, put on his felt overboots, his fur-lined
      coat, his cap and hood, and went out with the doctor. There was not a very
      sharp frost, but a violent and piercing wind was blowing and driving along
      the street the clouds of snow which seemed to be racing away in terror:
      high drifts were heaped up already under the fences and at the doorways.
      The doctor and the examining magistrate got into the sledge, and the white
      coachman bent over them to button up the cover. They were both hot.
    

      “Ready!”
    

      They drove through the village. “Cutting a feathery furrow,”
      thought the examining magistrate, listlessly watching the action of the
      trace horse’s legs. There were lights in all the huts, as though it
      were the eve of a great holiday: the peasants had not gone to bed because
      they were afraid of the dead body. The coachman preserved a sullen
      silence, probably he had felt dreary while he was waiting by the Zemstvo
      hut, and now he, too, was thinking of the dead man.
    

      “At the Von Taunitz’s,” said Startchenko, “they
      all set upon me when they heard that you were left to spend the night in
      the hut, and asked me why I did not bring you with me.”
    

      As they drove out of the village, at the turning the coachman suddenly
      shouted at the top of his voice: “Out of the way!”
    

      They caught a glimpse of a man: he was standing up to his knees in the
      snow, moving off the road and staring at the horses. The examining
      magistrate saw a stick with a crook, and a beard and a bag, and he fancied
      that it was Loshadin, and even fancied that he was smiling. He flashed by
      and disappeared.
    

      The road ran at first along the edge of the forest, then along a broad
      forest clearing; they caught glimpses of old pines and a young birch
      copse, and tall, gnarled young oak trees standing singly in the clearings
      where the wood had lately been cut; but soon it was all merged in the
      clouds of snow. The coachman said he could see the forest; the examining
      magistrate could see nothing but the trace horse. The wind blew on their
      backs.
    

      All at once the horses stopped.
    

      “Well, what is it now?” asked Startchenko crossly.
    

      The coachman got down from the box without a word and began running round
      the sledge, treading on his heels; he made larger and larger circles,
      getting further and further away from the sledge, and it looked as though
      he were dancing; at last he came back and began to turn off to the right.
    

      “You’ve got off the road, eh?” asked Startchenko.
    

      “It’s all ri-ight....”
    

      Then there was a little village and not a single light in it. Again the
      forest and the fields. Again they lost the road, and again the coachman
      got down from the box and danced round the sledge. The sledge flew along a
      dark avenue, flew swiftly on. And the heated trace horse’s hoofs
      knocked against the sledge. Here there was a fearful roaring sound from
      the trees, and nothing could be seen, as though they were flying on into
      space; and all at once the glaring light at the entrance and the windows
      flashed upon their eyes, and they heard the good-natured, drawn-out
      barking of dogs. They had arrived.
    

      While they were taking off their fur coats and their felt boots below,
      “Un Petit Verre de Clicquot” was being played upon the piano
      overhead, and they could hear the children beating time with their feet.
      Immediately on going in they were aware of the snug warmth and special
      smell of the old apartments of a mansion where, whatever the weather
      outside, life is so warm and clean and comfortable.
    

      “That’s capital!” said Von Taunitz, a fat man with an
      incredibly thick neck and with whiskers, as he shook the examining
      magistrate’s hand. “That’s capital! You are very
      welcome, delighted to make your acquaintance. We are colleagues to some
      extent, you know. At one time I was deputy prosecutor; but not for long,
      only two years. I came here to look after the estate, and here I have
      grown old—an old fogey, in fact. You are very welcome,” he
      went on, evidently restraining his voice so as not to speak too loud; he
      was going upstairs with his guests. “I have no wife, she’s
      dead. But here, I will introduce my daughters,” and turning round,
      he shouted down the stairs in a voice of thunder: “Tell Ignat to
      have the sledge ready at eight o’clock to-morrow morning.”
    

      His four daughters, young and pretty girls, all wearing gray dresses and
      with their hair done up in the same style, and their cousin, also young
      and attractive, with her children, were in the drawing-room. Startchenko,
      who knew them already, began at once begging them to sing something, and
      two of the young ladies spent a long time declaring they could not sing
      and that they had no music; then the cousin sat down to the piano, and
      with trembling voices, they sang a duet from “The Queen of Spades.”
      Again “Un Petit Verre de Clicquot” was played, and the
      children skipped about, beating time with their feet. And Startchenko
      pranced about too. Everybody laughed.
    

      Then the children said good-night and went off to bed. The examining
      magistrate laughed, danced a quadrille, flirted, and kept wondering
      whether it was not all a dream? The kitchen of the Zemstvo hut, the heap
      of hay in the corner, the rustle of the beetles, the revolting
      poverty-stricken surroundings, the voices of the witnesses, the wind, the
      snow storm, the danger of being lost; and then all at once this splendid,
      brightly lighted room, the sounds of the piano, the lovely girls, the
      curly-headed children, the gay, happy laughter—such a transformation
      seemed to him like a fairy tale, and it seemed incredible that such
      transitions were possible at the distance of some two miles in the course
      of one hour. And dreary thoughts prevented him from enjoying himself, and
      he kept thinking this was not life here, but bits of life fragments, that
      everything here was accidental, that one could draw no conclusions from
      it; and he even felt sorry for these girls, who were living and would end
      their lives in the wilds, in a province far away from the center of
      culture, where nothing is accidental, but everything is in accordance with
      reason and law, and where, for instance, every suicide is intelligible, so
      that one can explain why it has happened and what is its significance in
      the general scheme of things. He imagined that if the life surrounding him
      here in the wilds were not intelligible to him, and if he did not see it,
      it meant that it did not exist at all.
    

      At supper the conversation turned on Lesnitsky.
    

      “He left a wife and child,” said Startchenko. “I would
      forbid neurasthenics and all people whose nervous system is out of order
      to marry, I would deprive them of the right and possibility of multiplying
      their kind. To bring into the world nervous, invalid children is a crime.”
    

      “He was an unfortunate young man,” said Von Taunitz, sighing
      gently and shaking his head. “What a lot one must suffer and think
      about before one brings oneself to take one’s own life,... a young
      life! Such a misfortune may happen in any family, and that is awful. It is
      hard to bear such a thing, insufferable....”
    

      And all the girls listened in silence with grave faces, looking at their
      father. Lyzhin felt that he, too, must say something, but he couldn’t
      think of anything, and merely said:
    

      “Yes, suicide is an undesirable phenomenon.”
    

      He slept in a warm room, in a soft bed covered with a quilt under which
      there were fine clean sheets, but for some reason did not feel
      comfortable: perhaps because the doctor and Von Taunitz were, for a long
      time, talking in the adjoining room, and overhead he heard, through the
      ceiling and in the stove, the wind roaring just as in the Zemstvo hut, and
      as plaintively howling: “Oo-oo-oo-oo!”
    

      Von Taunitz’s wife had died two years before, and he was still
      unable to resign himself to his loss and, whatever he was talking about,
      always mentioned his wife; and there was no trace of a prosecutor left
      about him now.
    

      “Is it possible that I may some day come to such a condition?”
      thought Lyzhin, as he fell asleep, still hearing through the wall his host’s
      subdued, as it were bereaved, voice.
    

      The examining magistrate did not sleep soundly. He felt hot and
      uncomfortable, and it seemed to him in his sleep that he was not at Von
      Taunitz’s, and not in a soft clean bed, but still in the hay at the
      Zemstvo hut, hearing the subdued voices of the witnesses; he fancied that
      Lesnitsky was close by, not fifteen paces away. In his dreams he
      remembered how the insurance agent, black-haired and pale, wearing dusty
      high boots, had come into the bookkeeper’s office. “This is
      our insurance agent....”
    

      Then he dreamed that Lesnitsky and Loshadin the constable were walking
      through the open country in the snow, side by side, supporting each other;
      the snow was whirling about their heads, the wind was blowing on their
      backs, but they walked on, singing: “We go on, and on, and on....”
    

      The old man was like a magician in an opera, and both of them were singing
      as though they were on the stage:
    

      “We go on, and on, and on!... You are in the warmth, in the light
      and snugness, but we are walking in the frost and the storm, through the
      deep snow.... We know nothing of ease, we know nothing of joy.... We bear
      all the burden of this life, yours and ours.... Oo-oo-oo! We go on, and
      on, and on....”
    

      Lyzhin woke and sat up in bed. What a confused, bad dream! And why did he
      dream of the constable and the agent together? What nonsense! And now
      while Lyzhin’s heart was throbbing violently and he was sitting on
      his bed, holding his head in his hands, it seemed to him that there really
      was something in common between the lives of the insurance agent and the
      constable. Don’t they really go side by side holding each other up?
      Some tie unseen, but significant and essential, existed between them, and
      even between them and Von Taunitz and between all men—all men; in
      this life, even in the remotest desert, nothing is accidental, everything
      is full of one common idea, everything has one soul, one aim, and to
      understand it it is not enough to think, it is not enough to reason, one
      must have also, it seems, the gift of insight into life, a gift which is
      evidently not bestowed on all. And the unhappy man who had broken down,
      who had killed himself—the “neurasthenic,” as the doctor
      called him—and the old peasant who spent every day of his life going
      from one man to another, were only accidental, were only fragments of life
      for one who thought of his own life as accidental, but were parts of one
      organism—marvelous and rational—for one who thought of his own
      life as part of that universal whole and understood it. So thought Lyzhin,
      and it was a thought that had long lain hidden in his soul, and only now
      it was unfolded broadly and clearly to his consciousness.
    

      He lay down and began to drop asleep; and again they were going along
      together, singing: “We go on, and on, and on.... We take from life
      what is hardest and bitterest in it, and we leave you what is easy and
      joyful; and sitting at supper, you can coldly and sensibly discuss why we
      suffer and perish, and why we are not as sound and as satisfied as you.”
    

      What they were singing had occurred to his mind before, but the thought
      was somewhere in the background behind his other thoughts, and flickered
      timidly like a faraway light in foggy weather. And he felt that this
      suicide and the peasant’s sufferings lay upon his conscience, too;
      to resign himself to the fact that these people, submissive to their fate,
      should take up the burden of what was hardest and gloomiest in life—how
      awful it was! To accept this, and to desire for himself a life full of
      light and movement among happy and contented people, and to be continually
      dreaming of such, means dreaming of fresh suicides of men crushed by toil
      and anxiety, or of men weak and outcast whom people only talk of sometimes
      at supper with annoyance or mockery, without going to their help.... And
      again:
    

      “We go on, and on, and on...” as though someone were beating
      with a hammer on his temples.
    

      He woke early in the morning with a headache, roused by a noise; in the
      next room Von Taunitz was saying loudly to the doctor:
    

      “It’s impossible for you to go now. Look what’s going on
      outside. Don’t argue, you had better ask the coachman; he won’t
      take you in such weather for a million.”
    

      “But it’s only two miles,” said the doctor in an
      imploring voice.
    

      “Well, if it were only half a mile. If you can’t, then you can’t.
      Directly you drive out of the gates it is perfect hell, you would be off
      the road in a minute. Nothing will induce me to let you go, you can say
      what you like.”
    

      “It’s bound to be quieter towards evening,” said the
      peasant who was heating the stove.
    

      And in the next room the doctor began talking of the rigorous climate and
      its influence on the character of the Russian, of the long winters which,
      by preventing movement from place to place, hinder the intellectual
      development of the people; and Lyzhin listened with vexation to these
      observations and looked out of window at the snow drifts which were piled
      on the fence. He gazed at the white dust which covered the whole visible
      expanse, at the trees which bowed their heads despairingly to right and
      then to left, listened to the howling and the banging, and thought
      gloomily:
    

      “Well, what moral can be drawn from it? It’s a blizzard and
      that is all about it....”
    

      At midday they had lunch, then wandered aimlessly about the house; they
      went to the windows.
    

      “And Lesnitsky is lying there,” thought Lyzhin, watching the
      whirling snow, which raced furiously round and round upon the drifts.
      “Lesnitsky is lying there, the witnesses are waiting....”
    

      They talked of the weather, saying that the snowstorm usually lasted two
      days and nights, rarely longer. At six o’clock they had dinner, then
      they played cards, sang, danced; at last they had supper. The day was
      over, they went to bed.
    

      In the night, towards morning, it all subsided. When they got up and
      looked out of window, the bare willows with their weakly drooping branches
      were standing perfectly motionless; it was dull and still, as though
      nature now were ashamed of its orgy, of its mad nights, and the license it
      had given to its passions. The horses, harnessed tandem, had been waiting
      at the front door since five o’clock in the morning. When it was
      fully daylight the doctor and the examining magistrate put on their fur
      coats and felt boots, and, saying good-by to their host, went out.
    

      At the steps beside the coachman stood the familiar figure of the
      constable, Ilya Loshadin, with an old leather bag across his shoulder and
      no cap on his head, covered with snow all over, and his face was red and
      wet with perspiration. The footman who had come out to help the gentlemen
      and cover their legs looked at him sternly and said:
    

      “What are you standing here for, you old devil? Get away!”
    

      “Your honor, the people are anxious,” said Loshadin, smiling
      naively all over his face, and evidently pleased at seeing at last the
      people he had waited for so long. “The people are very uneasy, the
      children are crying.... They thought, your honor, that you had gone back
      to the town again. Show us the heavenly mercy, our benefactors!...”
    

      The doctor and the examining magistrate said nothing, got into the sledge,
      and drove to Syrnya.
    







      THE FIRST-CLASS PASSENGER
    

A FIRST-CLASS
      passenger who had just dined at the station and drunk a little too much
      lay down on the velvet-covered seat, stretched himself out luxuriously,
      and sank into a doze. After a nap of no more than five minutes, he looked
      with oily eyes at his vis-a-vis, gave a smirk, and said:
    

      “My father of blessed memory used to like to have his heels tickled
      by peasant women after dinner. I am just like him, with this difference,
      that after dinner I always like my tongue and my brains gently stimulated.
      Sinful man as I am, I like empty talk on a full stomach. Will you allow me
      to have a chat with you?”
    

      “I shall be delighted,” answered the vis-a-vis.


      “After a good dinner the most trifling subject is sufficient to
      arouse devilishly great thoughts in my brain. For instance, we saw just
      now near the refreshment bar two young men, and you heard one congratulate
      the other on being celebrated. ‘I congratulate you,’ he said;
      ‘you are already a celebrity and are beginning to win fame.’
      Evidently actors or journalists of microscopic dimensions. But they are
      not the point. The question that is occupying my mind at the moment, sir,
      is exactly what is to be understood by the word fame or charity.
      What do you think? Pushkin called fame a bright patch on a ragged garment;
      we all understand it as Pushkin does—that is, more or less
      subjectively—but no one has yet given a clear, logical definition of
      the word.... I would give a good deal for such a definition!”
    

      “Why do you feel such a need for it?”
    

      “You see, if we knew what fame is, the means of attaining it might
      also perhaps be known to us,” said the first-class passenger, after
      a moment’s thought. “I must tell you, sir, that when I was
      younger I strove after celebrity with every fiber of my being. To be
      popular was my craze, so to speak. For the sake of it I studied, worked,
      sat up at night, neglected my meals. And I fancy, as far as I can judge
      without partiality, I had all the natural gifts for attaining it. To begin
      with, I am an engineer by profession. In the course of my life I have
      built in Russia some two dozen magnificent bridges, I have laid aqueducts
      for three towns; I have worked in Russia, in England, in Belgium....
      Secondly, I am the author of several special treatises in my own line. And
      thirdly, my dear sir, I have from a boy had a weakness for chemistry.
      Studying that science in my leisure hours, I discovered methods of
      obtaining certain organic acids, so that you will find my name in all the
      foreign manuals of chemistry. I have always been in the service, I have
      risen to the grade of actual civil councilor, and I have an unblemished
      record. I will not fatigue your attention by enumerating my works and my
      merits, I will only say that I have done far more than some celebrities.
      And yet here I am in my old age, I am getting ready for my coffin, so to
      say, and I am as celebrated as that black dog yonder running on the
      embankment.”
    

      “How can you tell? Perhaps you are celebrated.”
    

      “H’m! Well, we will test it at once. Tell me, have you ever
      heard the name Krikunov?”
    

      The vis-a-vis raised his eyes to the ceiling, thought a minute, and
      laughed.
    

      “No, I haven’t heard it,...” he said.
    

      “That is my surname. You, a man of education, getting on in years,
      have never heard of me—a convincing proof! It is evident that in my
      efforts to gain fame I have not done the right thing at all: I did not
      know the right way to set to work, and, trying to catch fame by the tail,
      got on the wrong side of her.”
    

      “What is the right way to set to work?”
    

      “Well, the devil only knows! Talent, you say? Genius? Originality?
      Not a bit of it, sir!... People have lived and made a career side by side
      with me who were worthless, trivial, and even contemptible compared with
      me. They did not do one-tenth of the work I did, did not put themselves
      out, were not distinguished for their talents, and did not make an effort
      to be celebrated, but just look at them! Their names are continually in
      the newspapers and on men’s lips! If you are not tired of listening
      I will illustrate it by an example. Some years ago I built a bridge in the
      town of K. I must tell you that the dullness of that scurvy little town
      was terrible. If it had not been for women and cards I believe I should
      have gone out of my mind. Well, it’s an old story: I was so bored
      that I got into an affair with a singer. Everyone was enthusiastic about
      her, the devil only knows why; to my thinking she was—what shall I
      say?—an ordinary, commonplace creature, like lots of others. The
      hussy was empty-headed, ill-tempered, greedy, and what’s more, she
      was a fool.
    

      “She ate and drank a vast amount, slept till five o clock in the
      afternoon—and I fancy did nothing else. She was looked upon as a
      cocotte, and that was indeed her profession; but when people wanted to
      refer to her in a literary fashion, they called her an actress and a
      singer. I used to be devoted to the theatre, and therefore this fraudulent
      pretense of being an actress made me furiously indignant. My young lady
      had not the slightest right to call herself an actress or a singer. She
      was a creature entirely devoid of talent, devoid of feeling—a
      pitiful creature one may say. As far as I can judge she sang disgustingly.
      The whole charm of her ‘art’ lay in her kicking up her legs on
      every suitable occasion, and not being embarrassed when people walked into
      her dressing-room. She usually selected translated vaudevilles, with
      singing in them, and opportunities for disporting herself in male attire,
      in tights. In fact it was—ough! Well, I ask your attention. As I
      remember now, a public ceremony took place to celebrate the opening of the
      newly constructed bridge. There was a religious service, there were
      speeches, telegrams, and so on. I hung about my cherished creation, you
      know, all the while afraid that my heart would burst with the excitement
      of an author. It’s an old story and there’s no need for false
      modesty, and so I will tell you that my bridge was a magnificent work! It
      was not a bridge but a picture, a perfect delight! And who would not have
      been excited when the whole town came to the opening? ‘Oh,’ I
      thought, ‘now the eyes of all the public will be on me! Where shall
      I hide myself?’ Well, I need not have worried myself, sir—alas!
      Except the official personages, no one took the slightest notice of me.
      They stood in a crowd on the river-bank, gazed like sheep at the bridge,
      and did not concern themselves to know who had built it. And it was from
      that time, by the way, that I began to hate our estimable public—damnation
      take them! Well, to continue. All at once the public became agitated; a
      whisper ran through the crowd,... a smile came on their faces, their
      shoulders began to move. ‘They must have seen me,’ I thought.
      A likely idea! I looked, and my singer, with a train of young scamps, was
      making her way through the crowd. The eyes of the crowd were hurriedly
      following this procession. A whisper began in a thousand voices: ‘That’s
      so-and-so.... Charming! Bewitching!’ Then it was they noticed me....
      A couple of young milksops, local amateurs of the scenic art, I presume,
      looked at me, exchanged glances, and whispered: ‘That’s her
      lover!’ How do you like that? And an unprepossessing individual in a
      top-hat, with a chin that badly needed shaving, hung round me, shifting
      from one foot to the other, then turned to me with the words:
    

      “‘Do you know who that lady is, walking on the other bank?
      That’s so-and-so.... Her voice is beneath all criticism, but she has
      a most perfect mastery of it!...’
    

      “‘Can you tell me,’ I asked the unprepossessing
      individual, ‘who built this bridge?’
    

      “‘I really don’t know,’ answered the individual;
      some engineer, I expect.’
    

      “‘And who built the cathedral in your town?’ I asked
      again.
    

      “‘I really can’t tell you.’
    

      “Then I asked him who was considered the best teacher in K., who the
      best architect, and to all my questions the unprepossessing individual
      answered that he did not know.
    

      “‘And tell me, please,’ I asked in conclusion, with whom
      is that singer living?’
    

      “‘With some engineer called Krikunov.’
    

      “Well, how do you like that, sir? But to proceed. There are no
      minnesingers or bards nowadays, and celebrity is created almost
      exclusively by the newspapers. The day after the dedication of the bridge,
      I greedily snatched up the local Messenger, and looked for myself
      in it. I spent a long time running my eyes over all the four pages, and at
      last there it was—hurrah! I began reading: ‘Yesterday in
      beautiful weather, before a vast concourse of people, in the presence of
      His Excellency the Governor of the province, so-and-so, and other
      dignitaries, the ceremony of the dedication of the newly constructed
      bridge took place,’ and so on.... Towards the end: Our talented
      actress so-and-so, the favorite of the K. public, was present at the
      dedication looking very beautiful. I need not say that her arrival created
      a sensation. The star was wearing...’ and so on. They might have
      given me one word! Half a word. Petty as it seems, I actually cried with
      vexation!
    

      “I consoled myself with the reflection that the provinces are
      stupid, and one could expect nothing of them and for celebrity one must go
      to the intellectual centers—to Petersburg and to Moscow. And as it
      happened, at that very time there was a work of mine in Petersburg which I
      had sent in for a competition. The date on which the result was to be
      declared was at hand.
    

      “I took leave of K. and went to Petersburg. It is a long journey
      from K. to Petersburg, and that I might not be bored on the journey I took
      a reserved compartment and—well—of course, I took my singer.
      We set off, and all the way we were eating, drinking champagne, and—tra-la-la!
      But behold, at last we reach the intellectual center. I arrived on the
      very day the result was declared, and had the satisfaction, my dear sir,
      of celebrating my own success: my work received the first prize. Hurrah!
      Next day I went out along the Nevsky and spent seventy kopecks on various
      newspapers. I hastened to my hotel room, lay down on the sofa, and,
      controlling a quiver of excitement, made haste to read. I ran through one
      newspaper—nothing. I ran through a second—nothing either; my
      God! At last, in the fourth, I lighted upon the following paragraph:
      ‘Yesterday the well-known provincial actress so-and-so arrived by
      express in Petersburg. We note with pleasure that the climate of the South
      has had a beneficial effect on our fair friend; her charming stage
      appearance...’ and I don't remember the rest! Much lower down than
      that paragraph I found, printed in the smallest type: ’First prize
      in the competition was adjudged to an engineer called so-and-so.’
      That was all! And to make things better, they even misspelt my name:
      instead of Krikunov it was Kirkutlov. So much for your intellectual
      center! But that was not all.... By the time I left Petersburg, a month
      later, all the newspapers were vying with one another in discussing our
      incomparable, divine, highly talented actress, and my mistress was
      referred to, not by her surname, but by her Christian name and her father’s....
    

      “Some years later I was in Moscow. I was summoned there by a letter,
      in the mayor’s own handwriting, to undertake a work for which
      Moscow, in its newspapers, had been clamoring for over a hundred years. In
      the intervals of my work I delivered five public lectures, with a
      philanthropic object, in one of the museums there. One would have thought
      that was enough to make one known to the whole town for three days at
      least, wouldn’t one? But, alas! not a single Moscow gazette said a
      word about me. There was something about houses on fire, about an
      operetta, sleeping town councilors, drunken shop keepers—about
      everything; but about my work, my plans, my lectures—mum. And a nice
      set they are in Moscow! I got into a tram.... It was packed full; there
      were ladies and military men and students of both sexes, creatures of all
      sorts in couples.
    

      “‘I am told the town council has sent for an engineer to plan
      such and such a work!’ I said to my neighbor, so loudly that all the
      tram could hear. ‘Do you know the name of the engineer?’
    

      “My neighbor shook his head. The rest of the public took a cursory
      glance at me, and in all their eyes I read: ‘I don’t know.’
    

      “‘I am told that there is someone giving lectures in such and
      such a museum?’ I persisted, trying to get up a conversation.
      ‘I hear it is interesting.’
    

      “No one even nodded. Evidently they had not all of them heard of the
      lectures, and the ladies were not even aware of the existence of the
      museum. All that would not have mattered, but imagine, my dear sir, the
      people suddenly leaped to their feet and struggled to the windows. What
      was it? What was the matter?
    

      “‘Look, look!’ my neighbor nudged me. ‘Do you see
      that dark man getting into that cab? That’s the famous runner, King!’
    

      “And the whole tram began talking breathlessly of the runner who was
      then absorbing the brains of Moscow.
    

      “I could give you ever so many other examples, but I think that is
      enough. Now let us assume that I am mistaken about myself, that I am a
      wretchedly boastful and incompetent person; but apart from myself I might
      point to many of my contemporaries, men remarkable for their talent and
      industry, who have nevertheless died unrecognized. Are Russian navigators,
      chemists, physicists, mechanicians, and agriculturists popular with the
      public? Do our cultivated masses know anything of Russian artists,
      sculptors, and literary men? Some old literary hack, hard-working and
      talented, will wear away the doorstep of the publishers’ offices for
      thirty-three years, cover reams of paper, be had up for libel twenty
      times, and yet not step beyond his ant-heap. Can you mention to me a
      single representative of our literature who would have become celebrated
      if the rumor had not been spread over the earth that he had been killed in
      a duel, gone out of his mind, been sent into exile, or had cheated at
      cards?”
    

      The first-class passenger was so excited that he dropped his cigar out of
      his mouth and got up.
    

      “Yes,” he went on fiercely, “and side by side with these
      people I can quote you hundreds of all sorts of singers, acrobats,
      buffoons, whose names are known to every baby. Yes!”
    

      The door creaked, there was a draught, and an individual of forbidding
      aspect, wearing an Inverness coat, a top-hat, and blue spectacles, walked
      into the carriage. The individual looked round at the seats, frowned, and
      went on further.
    

      “Do you know who that is?” there came a timid whisper from the
      furthest corner of the compartment.
    

      “That is N. N., the famous Tula cardsharper who was had up in
      connection with the Y. bank affair.”
    

      “There you are!” laughed the first-class passenger. “He
      knows a Tula cardsharper, but ask him whether he knows Semiradsky,
      Tchaykovsky, or Solovyov the philosopher—he’ll shake his
      head.... It swinish!”
    

      Three minutes passed in silence.
    

      “Allow me in my turn to ask you a question,” said the vis-a-vis
      timidly, clearing his throat. “Do you know the name of Pushkov?”
    

      “Pushkov? H’m! Pushkov.... No, I don’t know it!”
    

      “That is my name,...” said the vis-a-vis,, overcome
      with embarrassment. “Then you don’t know it? And yet I have
      been a professor at one of the Russian universities for thirty-five
      years,... a member of the Academy of Sciences,... have published more than
      one work....”
    

      The first-class passenger and the vis-a-vis looked at each other
      and burst out laughing.
    







      A TRAGIC ACTOR
    

IT was the benefit
      night of Fenogenov, the tragic actor. They were acting “Prince
      Serebryany.” The tragedian himself was playing Vyazemsky; Limonadov,
      the stage manager, was playing Morozov; Madame Beobahtov, Elena. The
      performance was a grand success. The tragedian accomplished wonders
      indeed. When he was carrying off Elena, he held her in one hand above his
      head as he dashed across the stage. He shouted, hissed, banged with his
      feet, tore his coat across his chest. When he refused to fight Morozov, he
      trembled all over as nobody ever trembles in reality, and gasped loudly.
      The theatre shook with applause. There were endless calls. Fenogenov was
      presented with a silver cigarette-case and a bouquet tied with long
      ribbons. The ladies waved their handkerchiefs and urged their men to
      applaud, many shed tears.... But the one who was the most enthusiastic and
      most excited was Masha, daughter of Sidoretsky the police captain. She was
      sitting in the first row of the stalls beside her papa; she was ecstatic
      and could not take her eyes off the stage even between the acts. Her
      delicate little hands and feet were quivering, her eyes were full of
      tears, her cheeks turned paler and paler. And no wonder—she was at
      the theatre for the first time in her life.
    

      “How well they act! how splendidly!” she said to her papa the
      police captain, every time the curtain fell. “How good Fenogenov is!”
    

      And if her papa had been capable of reading faces he would have read on
      his daughter’s pale little countenance a rapture that was almost
      anguish. She was overcome by the acting, by the play, by the surroundings.
      When the regimental band began playing between the acts, she closed her
      eyes, exhausted.
    

      “Papa!” she said to the police captain during the last
      interval, “go behind the scenes and ask them all to dinner
      to-morrow!”
    

      The police captain went behind the scenes, praised them for all their fine
      acting, and complimented Madame Beobahtov.
    

      “Your lovely face demands a canvas, and I only wish I could wield
      the brush!”
    

      And with a scrape, he thereupon invited the company to dinner.
    

      “All except the fair sex,” he whispered. “I don’t
      want the actresses, for I have a daughter.”
    

      Next day the actors dined at the police captain’s. Only three turned
      up, the manager Limonadov, the tragedian Fenogenov, and the comic man
      Vodolazov; the others sent excuses. The dinner was a dull affair.
      Limonadov kept telling the police captain how much he respected him, and
      how highly he thought of all persons in authority; Vodolazov mimicked
      drunken merchants and Armenians; and Fenogenov (on his passport his name
      was Knish), a tall, stout Little Russian with black eyes and frowning
      brow, declaimed “At the portals of the great,” and “To
      be or not to be.” Limonadov, with tears in his eyes, described his
      interview with the former Governor, General Kanyutchin. The police captain
      listened, was bored, and smiled affably. He was well satisfied, although
      Limonadov smelt strongly of burnt feathers, and Fenogenov was wearing a
      hired dress coat and boots trodden down at heel. They pleased his daughter
      and made her lively, and that was enough for him. And Masha never took her
      eyes off the actors. She had never before seen such clever, exceptional
      people!
    

      In the evening the police captain and Masha were at the theatre again. A
      week later the actors dined at the police captain’s again, and after
      that came almost every day either to dinner or supper. Masha became more
      and more devoted to the theatre, and went there every evening.
    

      She fell in love with the tragedian. One fine morning, when the police
      captain had gone to meet the bishop, Masha ran away with Limonadov’s
      company and married her hero on the way. After celebrating the wedding,
      the actors composed a long and touching letter and sent it to the police
      captain.
    

      It was the work of their combined efforts.
    

      “Bring out the motive, the motive!” Limonadov kept saying as
      he dictated to the comic man. “Lay on the respect.... These official
      chaps like it. Add something of a sort... to draw a tear.”
    

      The answer to this letter was most discomforting. The police captain
      disowned his daughter for marrying, as he said, “a stupid, idle
      Little Russian with no fixed home or occupation.”
    

      And the day after this answer was received Masha was writing to her
      father.
    

      “Papa, he beats me! Forgive us!”
    

      He had beaten her, beaten her behind the scenes, in the presence of
      Limonadov, the washerwoman, and two lighting men. He remembered how, four
      days before the wedding, he was sitting in the London Tavern with the
      whole company, and all were talking about Masha. The company were advising
      him to “chance it,” and Limonadov, with tears in his eyes
      urged: “It would be stupid and irrational to let slip such an
      opportunity! Why, for a sum like that one would go to Siberia, let alone
      getting married! When you marry and have a theatre of your own, take me
      into your company. I shan’t be master then, you’ll be master.”
    

      Fenogenov remembered it, and muttered with clenched fists:
    

      “If he doesn’t send money I’ll smash her! I won’t
      let myself be made a fool of, damn my soul!”
    

      At one provincial town the company tried to give Masha the slip, but Masha
      found out, ran to the station, and got there when the second bell had rung
      and the actors had all taken their seats.
    

      “I’ve been shamefully treated by your father,” said the
      tragedian; “all is over between us!”
    

      And though the carriage was full of people, she went down on her knees and
      held out her hands, imploring him:
    

      “I love you! Don’t drive me away, Kondraty Ivanovitch,”
      she besought him. “I can’t live without you!”
    

      They listened to her entreaties, and after consulting together, took her
      into the company as a “countess”—the name they used for
      the minor actresses who usually came on to the stage in crowds or in dumb
      parts. To begin with Masha used to play maid-servants and pages, but when
      Madame Beobahtov, the flower of Limonadov’s company, eloped, they
      made her ingenue. She acted badly, lisped, and was nervous. She
      soon grew used to it, however, and began to be liked by the audience.
      Fenogenov was much displeased.
    

      “To call her an actress!” he used to say. “She has no
      figure, no deportment, nothing whatever but silliness.”
    

      In one provincial town the company acted Schiller’s “Robbers.”
      Fenogenov played Franz, Masha, Amalie. The tragedian shouted and quivered.
      Masha repeated her part like a well-learnt lesson, and the play would have
      gone off as they generally did had it not been for a trifling mishap.
      Everything went well up to the point where Franz declares his love for
      Amalie and she seizes his sword. The tragedian shouted, hissed, quivered,
      and squeezed Masha in his iron embrace. And Masha, instead of repulsing
      him and crying “Hence!” trembled in his arms like a bird and
      did not move,... she seemed petrified.
    

      “Have pity on me!” she whispered in his ear. “Oh, have
      pity on me! I am so miserable!”
    

      “You don’t know your part! Listen to the prompter!”
      hissed the tragedian, and he thrust his sword into her hand.
    

      After the performance, Limonadov and Fenogenov were sitting in the ticket
      box-office engaged in conversation.
    

      “Your wife does not learn her part, you are right there,” the
      manager was saying. “She doesn’t know her line.... Every man
      has his own line,... but she doesn’t know hers....”
    

      Fenogenov listened, sighed, and scowled and scowled.
    

      Next morning, Masha was sitting in a little general shop writing:
    

      “Papa, he beats me! Forgive us! Send us some money!”
    







      A TRANSGRESSION
    

A COLLEGIATE
      assessor called Miguev stopped at a telegraph-post in the course of his
      evening walk and heaved a deep sigh. A week before, as he was returning
      home from his evening walk, he had been overtaken at that very spot by his
      former housemaid, Agnia, who said to him viciously:
    

      “Wait a bit! I’ll cook you such a crab that’ll teach you
      to ruin innocent girls! I’ll leave the baby at your door, and I’ll
      have the law of you, and I’ll tell your wife, too....”
    

      And she demanded that he should put five thousand roubles into the bank in
      her name. Miguev remembered it, heaved a sigh, and once more reproached
      himself with heartfelt repentance for the momentary infatuation which had
      caused him so much worry and misery.
    

      When he reached his bungalow, he sat down to rest on the doorstep. It was
      just ten o’clock, and a bit of the moon peeped out from behind the
      clouds. There was not a soul in the street nor near the bungalows; elderly
      summer visitors were already going to bed, while young ones were walking
      in the wood. Feeling in both his pockets for a match to light his
      cigarette, Miguev brought his elbow into contact with something soft. He
      looked idly at his right elbow, and his face was instantly contorted by a
      look of as much horror as though he had seen a snake beside him. On the
      step at the very door lay a bundle. Something oblong in shape was wrapped
      up in something—judging by the feel of it, a wadded quilt. One end
      of the bundle was a little open, and the collegiate assessor, putting in
      his hand, felt something damp and warm. He leaped on to his feet in
      horror, and looked about him like a criminal trying to escape from his
      warders....
    

      “She has left it!” he muttered wrathfully through his teeth,
      clenching his fists. “Here it lies.... Here lies my transgression! O
      Lord!”
    

      He was numb with terror, anger, and shame... What was he to do now? What
      would his wife say if she found out? What would his colleagues at the
      office say? His Excellency would be sure to dig him in the ribs, guffaw,
      and say: “I congratulate you!... He-he-he! Though your beard is
      gray, your heart is gay.... You are a rogue, Semyon Erastovitch!”
      The whole colony of summer visitors would know his secret now, and
      probably the respectable mothers of families would shut their doors to
      him. Such incidents always get into the papers, and the humble name of
      Miguev would be published all over Russia....
    

      The middle window of the bungalow was open and he could distinctly hear
      his wife, Anna Filippovna, laying the table for supper; in the yard close
      to the gate Yermolay, the porter, was plaintively strumming on the
      balalaika. The baby had only to wake up and begin to cry, and the secret
      would be discovered. Miguev was conscious of an overwhelming desire to
      make haste.
    

      “Haste, haste!...” he muttered, “this minute, before
      anyone sees. I’ll carry it away and lay it on somebody’s
      doorstep....”
    

      Miguev took the bundle in one hand and quietly, with a deliberate step to
      avoid awakening suspicion, went down the street....
    

      “A wonderfully nasty position!” he reflected, trying to assume
      an air of unconcern. “A collegiate assessor walking down the street
      with a baby! Good heavens! if anyone sees me and understands the position,
      I am done for.... I’d better put it on this doorstep.... No, stay,
      the windows are open and perhaps someone is looking. Where shall I put it?
      I know! I’ll take it to the merchant Myelkin’s.... Merchants
      are rich people and tenderhearted; very likely they will say thank you and
      adopt it.”
    

      And Miguev made up his mind to take the baby to Myelkin’s, although
      the merchant’s villa was in the furthest street, close to the river.
    

      “If only it does not begin screaming or wriggle out of the bundle,”
      thought the collegiate assessor. “This is indeed a pleasant
      surprise! Here I am carrying a human being under my arm as though it were
      a portfolio. A human being, alive, with soul, with feelings like anyone
      else.... If by good luck the Myelkins adopt him, he may turn out
      somebody.... Maybe he will become a professor, a great general, an
      author.... Anything may happen! Now I am carrying him under my arm like a
      bundle of rubbish, and perhaps in thirty or forty years I may not dare to
      sit down in his presence....”
    

      As Miguev was walking along a narrow, deserted alley, beside a long row of
      fences, in the thick black shade of the lime trees, it suddenly struck him
      that he was doing something very cruel and criminal.
    

      “How mean it is really!” he thought. “So mean that one
      can’t imagine anything meaner.... Why are we shifting this poor baby
      from door to door? It’s not its fault that it’s been born. It’s
      done us no harm. We are scoundrels.... We take our pleasure, and the
      innocent babies have to pay the penalty. Only to think of all this
      wretched business! I’ve done wrong and the child has a cruel fate
      before it. If I lay it at the Myelkins’ door, they’ll send it
      to the foundling hospital, and there it will grow up among strangers, in
      mechanical routine,... no love, no petting, no spoiling.... And then he’ll
      be apprenticed to a shoemaker,... he’ll take to drink, will learn to
      use filthy language, will go hungry. A shoemaker! and he the son of a
      collegiate assessor, of good family.... He is my flesh and blood,...
      ”
    

      Miguev came out of the shade of the lime trees into the bright moonlight
      of the open road, and opening the bundle, he looked at the baby.
    

      “Asleep!” he murmured. “You little rascal! why, you’ve
      an aquiline nose like your father’s.... He sleeps and doesn’t
      feel that it’s his own father looking at him!... It’s a drama,
      my boy... Well, well, you must forgive me. Forgive me, old boy.... It
      seems it’s your fate....”
    

      The collegiate assessor bHlinked and felt a spasm running down his
      cheeks.... He wrapped up the baby, put him under his arm, and strode on.
      All the way to the Myelkins’ villa social questions were swarming in
      his brain and conscience was gnawing in his bosom.
    

      “If I were a decent, honest man,” he thought, “I should
      damn everything, go with this baby to Anna Filippovna, fall on my knees
      before her, and say: ‘Forgive me! I have sinned! Torture me, but we
      won’t ruin an innocent child. We have no children; let us adopt him!’
      She’s a good sort, she’d consent.... And then my child would
      be with me.... Ech!”
    

      He reached the Myelkins’ villa and stood still hesitating. He
      imagined himself in the parlor at home, sitting reading the paper while a
      little boy with an aquiline nose played with the tassels of his dressing
      gown. At the same time visions forced themselves on his brain of his
      winking colleagues, and of his Excellency digging him in the ribs and
      guffawing.... Besides the pricking of his conscience, there was something
      warm, sad, and tender in his heart....
    

      Cautiously the collegiate assessor laid the baby on the verandah step and
      waved his hand. Again he felt a spasm run over his face....
    

      “Forgive me, old fellow! I am a scoundrel,” he muttered.
      “Don’t remember evil against me.”
    

      He stepped back, but immediately cleared his throat resolutely and said:
    

      “Oh, come what will! Damn it all! I’ll take him, and let
      people say what they like!”
    

      Miguev took the baby and strode rapidly back.
    

      “Let them say what they like,” he thought. “I’ll
      go at once, fall on my knees, and say: ‘Anna Filippovna!’ Anna
      is a good sort, she’ll understand.... And we’ll bring him
      up.... If it’s a boy we’ll call him Vladimir, and if it’s
      a girl we’ll call her Anna! Anyway, it will be a comfort in our old
      age.”
    

      And he did as he determined. Weeping and almost faint with shame and
      terror, full of hope and vague rapture, he went into his bungalow, went up
      to his wife, and fell on his knees before her.
    

      “Anna Filippovna!” he said with a sob, and he laid the baby on
      the floor. “Hear me before you punish.... I have sinned! This is my
      child.... You remember Agnia? Well, it was the devil drove me to it. ...”
    

      And, almost unconscious with shame and terror, he jumped up without
      waiting for an answer, and ran out into the open air as though he had
      received a thrashing....
    

      “I’ll stay here outside till she calls me,” he thought.
      “I’ll give her time to recover, and to think it over....”
    

      The porter Yermolay passed him with his balalaika, glanced at him and
      shrugged his shoulders. A minute later he passed him again, and again he
      shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “Here’s a go! Did you ever!” he muttered grinning.
      “Aksinya, the washer-woman, was here just now, Semyon Erastovitch.
      The silly woman put her baby down on the steps here, and while she was
      indoors with me, someone took and carried off the baby... Who’d have
      thought it!”
    

      “What? What are you saying?” shouted Miguev at the top of his
      voice.
    

      Yermolay, interpreting his master’s wrath in his own fashion,
      scratched his head and heaved a sigh.
    

      “I am sorry, Semyon Erastovitch,” he said, “but it’s
      the summer holidays,... one can’t get on without... without a woman,
      I mean....”
    

      And glancing at his master’s eyes glaring at him with anger and
      astonishment, he cleared his throat guiltily and went on:
    

      “It’s a sin, of course, but there—what is one to do?...
      You’ve forbidden us to have strangers in the house, I know, but we’ve
      none of our own now. When Agnia was here I had no women to see me, for I
      had one at home; but now, you can see for yourself, sir,... one can’t
      help having strangers. In Agnia’s time, of course, there was nothing
      irregular, because...”
    

      “Be off, you scoundrel!” Miguev shouted at him, stamping, and
      he went back into the room.
    

      Anna Filippovna, amazed and wrathful, was sitting as before, her
      tear-stained eyes fixed on the baby....
    

      “There! there!” Miguev muttered with a pale face, twisting his
      lips into a smile. “It was a joke.... It’s not my baby,... it’s
      the washer-woman’s!... I... I was joking.... Take it to the porter.”
    







      SMALL FRY
    

      |“HONORED Sir, Father and Benefactor!” a petty clerk called
      Nevyrazimov was writing a rough copy of an Easter congratulatory letter.
      “I trust that you may spend this Holy Day even as many more to come,
      in good health and prosperity. And to your family also I...”
    

      The lamp, in which the kerosene was getting low, was smoking and smelling.
      A stray cockroach was running about the table in alarm near Nevyrazimov’s
      writing hand. Two rooms away from the office Paramon the porter was for
      the third time cleaning his best boots, and with such energy that the
      sound of the blacking-brush and of his expectorations was audible in all
      the rooms.
    

      “What else can I write to him, the rascal?” Nevyrazimov
      wondered, raising his eyes to the smutty ceiling.
    

      On the ceiling he saw a dark circle—the shadow of the lamp-shade.
      Below it was the dusty cornice, and lower still the wall, which had once
      been painted a bluish muddy color. And the office seemed to him such a
      place of desolation that he felt sorry, not only for himself, but even for
      the cockroach.
    

      “When I am off duty I shall go away, but he’ll be on duty here
      all his cockroach-life,” he thought, stretching. “I am bored!
      Shall I clean my boots?”
    

      And stretching once more, Nevyrazimov slouched lazily to the porter’s
      room. Paramon had finished cleaning his boots. Crossing himself with one
      hand and holding the brush in the other, he was standing at the open
      window-pane, listening.
    

      “They’re ringing,” he whispered to Nevyrazimov, looking
      at him with eyes intent and wide open. “Already!”
    

      Nevyrazimov put his ear to the open pane and listened. The Easter chimes
      floated into the room with a whiff of fresh spring air. The booming of the
      bells mingled with the rumble of carriages, and above the chaos of sounds
      rose the brisk tenor tones of the nearest church and a loud shrill laugh.
    

      “What a lot of people!” sighed Nevyrazimov, looking down into
      the street, where shadows of men flitted one after another by the
      illumination lamps. “They’re all hurrying to the midnight
      service.... Our fellows have had a drink by now, you may be sure, and are
      strolling about the town. What a lot of laughter, what a lot of talk! I’m
      the only unlucky one, to have to sit here on such a day: And I have to do
      it every year!”
    

      “Well, nobody forces you to take the job. It’s not your turn
      to be on duty today, but Zastupov hired you to take his place. When other
      folks are enjoying themselves you hire yourself out. It’s
      greediness!”
    

      “Devil a bit of it! Not much to be greedy over—two roubles is
      all he gives me; a necktie as an extra.... It’s poverty, not
      greediness. And it would be jolly, now, you know, to be going with a party
      to the service, and then to break the fast.... To drink and to have a bit
      of supper and tumble off to sleep.... One sits down to the table, there’s
      an Easter cake and the samovar hissing, and some charming little thing
      beside you.... You drink a glass and chuck her under the chin, and it’s
      first-rate.... You feel you’re somebody.... Ech h-h!... I’ve
      made a mess of things! Look at that hussy driving by in her carriage,
      while I have to sit here and brood.”
    

      “We each have our lot in life, Ivan Danilitch. Please God, you’ll
      be promoted and drive about in your carriage one day.”
    

      “I? No, brother, not likely. I shan’t get beyond a ‘titular,’
      not if I try till I burst. I’m not an educated man.”
    

      “Our General has no education either, but...”
    

      “Well, but the General stole a hundred thousand before he got his
      position. And he’s got very different manners and deportment from
      me, brother. With my manners and deportment one can’t get far! And
      such a scoundrelly surname, Nevyrazimov! It’s a hopeless position,
      in fact. One may go on as one is, or one may hang oneself...”
    

      He moved away from the window and walked wearily about the rooms. The din
      of the bells grew louder and louder.... There was no need to stand by the
      window to hear it. And the better he could hear the bells and the louder
      the roar of the carriages, the darker seemed the muddy walls and the
      smutty cornice and the more the lamp smoked.
    

      “Shall I hook it and leave the office?” thought Nevyrazimov.
    

      But such a flight promised nothing worth having.... After coming out of
      the office and wandering about the town, Nevyrazimov would have gone home
      to his lodging, and in his lodging it was even grayer and more depressing
      than in the office.... Even supposing he were to spend that day pleasantly
      and with comfort, what had he beyond? Nothing but the same gray walls, the
      same stop-gap duty and complimentary letters....
    

      Nevyrazimov stood still in the middle of the office and sank into thought.
      The yearning for a new, better life gnawed at his heart with an
      intolerable ache. He had a passionate longing to find himself suddenly in
      the street, to mingle with the living crowd, to take part in the solemn
      festivity for the sake of which all those bells were clashing and those
      carriages were rumbling. He longed for what he had known in childhood—the
      family circle, the festive faces of his own people, the white cloth,
      light, warmth...! He thought of the carriage in which the lady had just
      driven by, the overcoat in which the head clerk was so smart, the gold
      chain that adorned the secretary’s chest.... He thought of a warm
      bed, of the Stanislav order, of new boots, of a uniform without holes in
      the elbows.... He thought of all those things because he had none of them.
    

      “Shall I steal?” he thought. “Even if stealing is an
      easy matter, hiding is what’s difficult. Men run away to America,
      they say, with what they’ve stolen, but the devil knows where that
      blessed America is. One must have education even to steal, it seems.”
    

      The bells died down. He heard only a distant noise of carriages and
      Paramon’s cough, while his depression and anger grew more and more
      intense and unbearable. The clock in the office struck half-past twelve.
    

      “Shall I write a secret report? Proshkin did, and he rose rapidly.”
    

      Nevyrazimov sat down at his table and pondered. The lamp in which the
      kerosene had quite run dry was smoking violently and threatening to go
      out. The stray cockroach was still running about the table and had found
      no resting-place.
    

      “One can always send in a secret report, but how is one to make it
      up? I should want to make all sorts of innuendoes and insinuations, like
      Proshkin, and I can’t do it. If I made up anything I should be the
      first to get into trouble for it. I’m an ass, damn my soul!”
    

      And Nevyrazimov, racking his brain for a means of escape from his hopeless
      position, stared at the rough copy he had written. The letter was written
      to a man whom he feared and hated with his whole soul, and from whom he
      had for the last ten years been trying to wring a post worth eighteen
      roubles a month, instead of the one he had at sixteen roubles.
    

      “Ah, I’ll teach you to run here, you devil!” He
      viciously slapped the palm of his hand on the cockroach, who had the
      misfortune to catch his eye. “Nasty thing!”
    

      The cockroach fell on its back and wriggled its legs in despair.
      Nevyrazimov took it by one leg and threw it into the lamp. The lamp flared
      up and spluttered.
    

      And Nevyrazimov felt better.
    







      THE REQUIEM
    

IN the village
      church of Verhny Zaprudy mass was just over. The people had begun moving
      and were trooping out of church. The only one who did not move was Andrey
      Andreyitch, a shopkeeper and old inhabitant of Verhny Zaprudy. He stood
      waiting, with his elbows on the railing of the right choir. His fat and
      shaven face, covered with indentations left by pimples, expressed on this
      occasion two contradictory feelings: resignation in the face of inevitable
      destiny, and stupid, unbounded disdain for the smocks and striped
      kerchiefs passing by him. As it was Sunday, he was dressed like a dandy.
      He wore a long cloth overcoat with yellow bone buttons, blue trousers not
      thrust into his boots, and sturdy goloshes—the huge clumsy goloshes
      only seen on the feet of practical and prudent persons of firm religious
      convictions.
    

      His torpid eyes, sunk in fat, were fixed upon the ikon stand. He saw the
      long familiar figures of the saints, the verger Matvey puffing out his
      cheeks and blowing out the candles, the darkened candle stands, the
      threadbare carpet, the sacristan Lopuhov running impulsively from the
      altar and carrying the holy bread to the churchwarden.... All these things
      he had seen for years, and seen over and over again like the five fingers
      of his hand.... There was only one thing, however, that was somewhat
      strange and unusual. Father Grigory, still in his vestments, was standing
      at the north door, twitching his thick eyebrows angrily.
    

      “Who is it he is winking at? God bless him!” thought the
      shopkeeper. “And he is beckoning with his finger! And he stamped his
      foot! What next! What’s the matter, Holy Queen and Mother! Whom does
      he mean it for?”
    

      Andrey Andreyitch looked round and saw the church completely deserted.
      There were some ten people standing at the door, but they had their backs
      to the altar.
    

      “Do come when you are called! Why do you stand like a graven image?”
      he heard Father Grigory’s angry voice. “I am calling you.”
    

      The shopkeeper looked at Father Grigory’s red and wrathful face, and
      only then realized that the twitching eyebrows and beckoning finger might
      refer to him. He started, left the railing, and hesitatingly walked
      towards the altar, tramping with his heavy goloshes.
    

      “Andrey Andreyitch, was it you asked for prayers for the rest of
      Mariya’s soul?” asked the priest, his eyes angrily transfixing
      the shopkeeper’s fat, perspiring face.
    

      “Yes, Father.”
    

      “Then it was you wrote this? You?” And Father Grigory angrily
      thrust before his eyes the little note.
    

      And on this little note, handed in by Andrey Andreyitch before mass, was
      written in big, as it were staggering, letters:
    

      “For the rest of the soul of the servant of God, the harlot Mariya.”
    

      “Yes, certainly I wrote it,...” answered the shopkeeper.
    

      “How dared you write it?” whispered the priest, and in his
      husky whisper there was a note of wrath and alarm.
    

      The shopkeeper looked at him in blank amazement; he was perplexed, and he,
      too, was alarmed. Father Grigory had never in his life spoken in such a
      tone to a leading resident of Verhny Zaprudy. Both were silent for a
      minute, staring into each other’s face. The shopkeeper’s
      amazement was so great that his fat face spread in all directions like
      spilt dough.
    

      “How dared you?” repeated the priest.
    

      “Wha... what?” asked Andrey Andreyitch in bewilderment.
    

      “You don’t understand?” whispered Father Grigory,
      stepping back in astonishment and clasping his hands. “What have you
      got on your shoulders, a head or some other object? You send a note up to
      the altar, and write a word in it which it would be unseemly even to utter
      in the street! Why are you rolling your eyes? Surely you know the meaning
      of the word?”
    

      “Are you referring to the word harlot?” muttered the
      shopkeeper, flushing crimson and bHlinking. “But you know, the Lord
      in His mercy... forgave this very thing,... forgave a harlot.... He has
      prepared a place for her, and indeed from the life of the holy saint,
      Mariya of Egypt, one may see in what sense the word is used—excuse
      me...”
    

      The shopkeeper wanted to bring forward some other argument in his
      justification, but took fright and wiped his lips with his sleeve.
    

      “So that’s what you make of it!” cried Father Grigory,
      clasping his hands. “But you see God has forgiven her—do you
      understand? He has forgiven, but you judge her, you slander her, call her
      by an unseemly name, and whom! Your own deceased daughter! Not only in
      Holy Scripture, but even in worldly literature you won’t read of
      such a sin! I tell you again, Andrey, you mustn’t be over-subtle!
      No, no, you mustn’t be over-subtle, brother! If God has given you an
      inquiring mind, and if you cannot direct it, better not go into things....
      Don’t go into things, and hold your peace!”
    

      “But you know, she,... excuse my mentioning it, was an actress!”
      articulated Andrey Andreyitch, overwhelmed.
    

      “An actress! But whatever she was, you ought to forget it all now
      she is dead, instead of writing it on the note.”
    

      “Just so,...” the shopkeeper assented.
    

      “You ought to do penance,” boomed the deacon from the depths
      of the altar, looking contemptuously at Andrey Andreyitch’s
      embarrassed face, “that would teach you to leave off being so
      clever! Your daughter was a well-known actress. There were even notices of
      her death in the newspapers.... Philosopher!”
    

      “To be sure,... certainly,” muttered the shopkeeper, “the
      word is not a seemly one; but I did not say it to judge her, Father
      Grigory, I only meant to speak spiritually,... that it might be clearer to
      you for whom you were praying. They write in the memorial notes the
      various callings, such as the infant John, the drowned woman Pelagea, the
      warrior Yegor, the murdered Pavel, and so on.... I meant to do the same.”
    

      “It was foolish, Andrey! God will forgive you, but beware another
      time. Above all, don’t be subtle, but think like other people. Make
      ten bows and go your way.”
    

      “I obey,” said the shopkeeper, relieved that the lecture was
      over, and allowing his face to resume its expression of importance and
      dignity. “Ten bows? Very good, I understand. But now, Father, allow
      me to ask you a favor.... Seeing that I am, anyway, her father,... you
      know yourself, whatever she was, she was still my daughter, so I was,...
      excuse me, meaning to ask you to sing the requiem today. And allow me to
      ask you, Father Deacon!”
    

      “Well, that’s good,” said Father Grigory, taking off his
      vestments. “That I commend. I can approve of that! Well, go your
      way. We will come out immediately.”
    

      Andrey Andreyitch walked with dignity from the altar, and with a solemn,
      requiem-like expression on his red face took his stand in the middle of
      the church. The verger Matvey set before him a little table with the
      memorial food upon it, and a little later the requiem service began.
    

      There was perfect stillness in the church. Nothing could be heard but the
      metallic click of the censer and slow singing.... Near Andrey Andreyitch
      stood the verger Matvey, the midwife Makaryevna, and her one-armed son
      Mitka. There was no one else. The sacristan sang badly in an unpleasant,
      hollow bass, but the tune and the words were so mournful that the
      shopkeeper little by little lost the expression of dignity and was plunged
      in sadness. He thought of his Mashutka,... he remembered she had been born
      when he was still a lackey in the service of the owner of Verhny Zaprudy.
      In his busy life as a lackey he had not noticed how his girl had grown up.
      That long period during which she was being shaped into a graceful
      creature, with a little flaxen head and dreamy eyes as big as
      kopeck-pieces passed unnoticed by him. She had been brought up like all
      the children of favorite lackeys, in ease and comfort in the company of
      the young ladies. The gentry, to fill up their idle time, had taught her
      to read, to write, to dance; he had had no hand in her bringing up. Only
      from time to time casually meeting her at the gate or on the landing of
      the stairs, he would remember that she was his daughter, and would, so far
      as he had leisure for it, begin teaching her the prayers and the
      scripture. Oh, even then he had the reputation of an authority on the
      church rules and the holy scriptures! Forbidding and stolid as her father’s
      face was, yet the girl listened readily. She repeated the prayers after
      him yawning, but on the other hand, when he, hesitating and trying to
      express himself elaborately, began telling her stories, she was all
      attention. Esau’s pottage, the punishment of Sodom, and the troubles
      of the boy Joseph made her turn pale and open her blue eyes wide.
    

      Afterwards when he gave up being a lackey, and with the money he had saved
      opened a shop in the village, Mashutka had gone away to Moscow with his
      master’s family....
    

      Three years before her death she had come to see her father. He had
      scarcely recognized her. She was a graceful young woman with the manners
      of a young lady, and dressed like one. She talked cleverly, as though from
      a book, smoked, and slept till midday. When Andrey Andreyitch asked her
      what she was doing, she had announced, looking him boldly straight in the
      face: “I am an actress.” Such frankness struck the former
      flunkey as the acme of cynicism. Mashutka had begun boasting of her
      successes and her stage life; but seeing that her father only turned
      crimson and threw up his hands, she ceased. And they spent a fortnight
      together without speaking or looking at one another till the day she went
      away. Before she went away she asked her father to come for a walk on the
      bank of the river. Painful as it was for him to walk in the light of day,
      in the sight of all honest people, with a daughter who was an actress, he
      yielded to her request.
    

      “What a lovely place you live in!” she said enthusiastically.
      “What ravines and marshes! Good heavens, how lovely my native place
      is!”
    

      And she had burst into tears.
    

      “The place is simply taking up room,...” Andrey Andreyvitch
      had thought, looking blankly at the ravines, not understanding his
      daughter’s enthusiasm. “There is no more profit from them than
      milk from a billy-goat.”
    

      And she had cried and cried, drawing her breath greedily with her whole
      chest, as though she felt she had not a long time left to breathe.
    

      Andrey Andreyitch shook his head like a horse that has been bitten, and to
      stifle painful memories began rapidly crossing himself....
    

      “Be mindful, O Lord,” he muttered, “of Thy departed
      servant, the harlot Mariya, and forgive her sins, voluntary or
      involuntary....”
    

      The unseemly word dropped from his lips again, but he did not notice it:
      what is firmly imbedded in the consciousness cannot be driven out by
      Father Grigory’s exhortations or even knocked out by a nail.
      Makaryevna sighed and whispered something, drawing in a deep breath, while
      one-armed Mitka was brooding over something....
    

      “Where there is no sickness, nor grief, nor sighing,” droned
      the sacristan, covering his right cheek with his hand.
    

      Bluish smoke coiled up from the censer and bathed in the broad, slanting
      patch of sunshine which cut across the gloomy, lifeless emptiness of the
      church. And it seemed as though the soul of the dead woman were soaring
      into the sunlight together with the smoke. The coils of smoke like a child’s
      curls eddied round and round, floating upwards to the window and, as it
      were, holding aloof from the woes and tribulations of which that poor soul
      was full.
    







      IN THE COACH-HOUSE
    

IT was between nine
      and ten o’clock in the evening. Stepan the coachman, Mihailo the
      house-porter, Alyoshka the coachman’s grandson, who had come up from
      the village to stay with his grandfather, and Nikandr, an old man of
      seventy, who used to come into the yard every evening to sell salt
      herrings, were sitting round a lantern in the big coach-house, playing
      “kings.” Through the wide-open door could be seen the whole
      yard, the big house, where the master’s family lived, the gates, the
      cellars, and the porter’s lodge. It was all shrouded in the darkness
      of night, and only the four windows of one of the lodges which was let
      were brightly lit up. The shadows of the coaches and sledges with their
      shafts tipped upwards stretched from the walls to the doors, quivering and
      cutting across the shadows cast by the lantern and the players.... On the
      other side of the thin partition that divided the coach-house from the
      stable were the horses. There was a scent of hay, and a disagreeable smell
      of salt herrings coming from old Nikandr.
    

      The porter won and was king; he assumed an attitude such as was in his
      opinion befitting a king, and blew his nose loudly on a red-checked
      handkerchief.
    

      “Now if I like I can chop off anybody’s head,” he said.
      Alyoshka, a boy of eight with a head of flaxen hair, left long uncut, who
      had only missed being king by two tricks, looked angrily and with envy at
      the porter. He pouted and frowned.
    

      “I shall give you the trick, grandfather,” he said, pondering
      over his cards; “I know you have got the queen of diamonds.”
    

      “Well, well, little silly, you have thought enough!”
    

      Alyoshka timidly played the knave of diamonds. At that moment a ring was
      heard from the yard.
    

      “Oh, hang you!” muttered the porter, getting up. “Go and
      open the gate, O king!”
    

      When he came back a little later, Alyoshka was already a prince, the
      fish-hawker a soldier, and the coachman a peasant.
    

      “It’s a nasty business,” said the porter, sitting down
      to the cards again. “I have just let the doctors out. They have not
      extracted it.”
    

      “How could they? Just think, they would have to pick open the
      brains. If there is a bullet in the head, of what use are doctors?”
    

      “He is lying unconscious,” the porter went on. “He is
      bound to die. Alyoshka, don’t look at the cards, you little puppy,
      or I will pull your ears! Yes, I let the doctors out, and the father and
      mother in... They have only just arrived. Such crying and wailing, Lord
      preserve us! They say he is the only son.... It’s a grief!”
    

      All except Alyoshka, who was absorbed in the game, looked round at the
      brightly lighted windows of the lodge.
    

      “I have orders to go to the police station tomorrow,” said the
      porter. “There will be an inquiry... But what do I know about it? I
      saw nothing of it. He called me this morning, gave me a letter, and said:
      ‘Put it in the letter-box for me.’ And his eyes were red with
      crying. His wife and children were not at home. They had gone out for a
      walk. So when I had gone with the letter, he put a bullet into his
      forehead from a revolver. When I came back his cook was wailing for the
      whole yard to hear.”
    

      “It’s a great sin,” said the fish-hawker in a husky
      voice, and he shook his head, “a great sin!”
    

      “From too much learning,” said the porter, taking a trick;
      “his wits outstripped his wisdom. Sometimes he would sit writing
      papers all night.... Play, peasant!... But he was a nice gentleman. And so
      white skinned, black-haired and tall!... He was a good lodger.”
    

      “It seems the fair sex is at the bottom of it,” said the
      coachman, slapping the nine of trumps on the king of diamonds. “It
      seems he was fond of another man’s wife and disliked his own; it
      does happen.”
    

      “The king rebels,” said the porter.
    

      At that moment there was again a ring from the yard. The rebellious king
      spat with vexation and went out. Shadows like dancing couples flitted
      across the windows of the lodge. There was the sound of voices and hurried
      footsteps in the yard.
    

      “I suppose the doctors have come again,” said the coachman.
      “Our Mihailo is run off his legs....”
    

      A strange wailing voice rang out for a moment in the air. Alyoshka looked
      in alarm at his grandfather, the coachman; then at the windows, and said:
    

      “He stroked me on the head at the gate yesterday, and said, ‘What
      district do you come from, boy?’ Grandfather, who was that howled
      just now?”
    

      His grandfather trimmed the light in the lantern and made no answer.
    

      “The man is lost,” he said a little later, with a yawn.
      “He is lost, and his children are ruined, too. It’s a disgrace
      for his children for the rest of their lives now.”
    

      The porter came back and sat down by the lantern.
    

      “He is dead,” he said. “They have sent to the almshouse
      for the old women to lay him out.”
    

      “The kingdom of heaven and eternal peace to him!” whispered
      the coachman, and he crossed himself.
    

      Looking at him, Alyoshka crossed himself too.
    

      “You can’t pray for such as him,” said the fish-hawker.
    

      “Why not?”
    

      “It’s a sin.”
    

      “That’s true,” the porter assented. “Now his soul
      has gone straight to hell, to the devil....”
    

      “It’s a sin,” repeated the fish-hawker; “such as
      he have no funeral, no requiem, but are buried like carrion with no
      respect.”
    

      The old man put on his cap and got up.
    

      “It was the same thing at our lady’s,” he said, pulling
      his cap on further. “We were serfs in those days; the younger son of
      our mistress, the General’s lady, shot himself through the mouth
      with a pistol, from too much learning, too. It seems that by law such have
      to be buried outside the cemetery, without priests, without a requiem
      service; but to save disgrace our lady, you know, bribed the police and
      the doctors, and they gave her a paper to say her son had done it when
      delirious, not knowing what he was doing. You can do anything with money.
      So he had a funeral with priests and every honor, the music played, and he
      was buried in the church; for the deceased General had built that church
      with his own money, and all his family were buried there. Only this is
      what happened, friends. One month passed, and then another, and it was all
      right. In the third month they informed the General’s lady that the
      watchmen had come from that same church. What did they want? They were
      brought to her, they fell at her feet. ‘We can’t go on
      serving, your excellency,’ they said. ‘Look out for other
      watchmen and graciously dismiss us.’ ‘What for?’ ‘No,’
      they said, ‘we can’t possibly; your son howls under the church
      all night.’”
    

      Alyoshka shuddered, and pressed his face to the coachman’s back so
      as not to see the windows.
    

      “At first the General’s lady would not listen,”
      continued the old man. “‘All this is your fancy, you simple
      folk have such notions,’ she said. ‘A dead man cannot howl.’
      Some time afterwards the watchmen came to her again, and with them the
      sacristan. So the sacristan, too, had heard him howling. The General’s
      lady saw that it was a bad job; she locked herself in her bedroom with the
      watchmen. ‘Here, my friends, here are twenty-five roubles for you,
      and for that go by night in secret, so that no one should hear or see you,
      dig up my unhappy son, and bury him,’ she said, ‘outside the
      cemetery.’ And I suppose she stood them a glass... And the watchmen
      did so. The stone with the inscription on it is there to this day, but he
      himself, the General’s son, is outside the cemetery.... O Lord,
      forgive us our transgressions!” sighed the fish-hawker. “There
      is only one day in the year when one may pray for such people: the
      Saturday before Trinity.... You mustn’t give alms to beggars for
      their sake, it is a sin, but you may feed the birds for the rest of their
      souls. The General’s lady used to go out to the crossroads every
      three days to feed the birds. Once at the cross-roads a black dog suddenly
      appeared; it ran up to the bread, and was such a... we all know what that
      dog was. The General’s lady was like a half-crazy creature for five
      days afterwards, she neither ate nor drank.... All at once she fell on her
      knees in the garden, and prayed and prayed.... Well, good-by, friends, the
      blessing of God and the Heavenly Mother be with you. Let us go, Mihailo,
      you’ll open the gate for me.”
    

      The fish-hawker and the porter went out. The coachman and Alyoshka went
      out too, so as not to be left in the coach-house.
    

      “The man was living and is dead!” said the coachman, looking
      towards the windows where shadows were still flitting to and fro. “Only
      this morning he was walking about the yard, and now he is lying dead.”
    

      “The time will come and we shall die too,” said the porter,
      walking away with the fish-hawker, and at once they both vanished from
      sight in the darkness.
    

      The coachman, and Alyoshka after him, somewhat timidly went up to the
      lighted windows. A very pale lady with large tear stained eyes, and a
      fine-looking gray headed man were moving two card-tables into the middle
      of the room, probably with the intention of laying the dead man upon them,
      and on the green cloth of the table numbers could still be seen written in
      chalk. The cook who had run about the yard wailing in the morning was now
      standing on a chair, stretching up to try and cover the looking glass with
      a towel.
    

      “Grandfather what are they doing?” asked Alyoshka in a
      whisper.
    

      “They are just going to lay him on the tables,” answered his
      grandfather. “Let us go, child, it is bedtime.”
    

      The coachman and Alyoshka went back to the coach-house. They said their
      prayers, and took off their boots. Stepan lay down in a corner on the
      floor, Alyoshka in a sledge. The doors of the coach house were shut, there
      was a horrible stench from the extinguished lantern. A little later
      Alyoshka sat up and looked about him; through the crack of the door he
      could still see a light from those lighted windows.
    

      “Grandfather, I am frightened!” he said.
    

      “Come, go to sleep, go to sleep!...”
    

      “I tell you I am frightened!”
    

      “What are you frightened of? What a baby!”
    

      They were silent.
    

      Alyoshka suddenly jumped out of the sledge and, loudly weeping, ran to his
      grandfather.
    

      “What is it? What’s the matter?” cried the coachman in a
      fright, getting up also.
    

      “He’s howling!”
    

      “Who is howling?”
    

      “I am frightened, grandfather, do you hear?”
    

      The coachman listened.
    

      “It’s their crying,” he said. “Come! there, little
      silly! They are sad, so they are crying.”
    

      “I want to go home,...” his grandson went on sobbing and
      trembling all over. “Grandfather, let us go back to the village, to
      mammy; come, grandfather dear, God will give you the heavenly kingdom for
      it....”
    

      “What a silly, ah! Come, be quiet, be quiet! Be quiet, I will light
      the lantern,... silly!”
    

      The coachman fumbled for the matches and lighted the lantern. But the
      light did not comfort Alyoshka.
    

      “Grandfather Stepan, let’s go to the village!” he
      besought him, weeping. “I am frightened here; oh, oh, how frightened
      I am! And why did you bring me from the village, accursed man?”
    

      “Who’s an accursed man? You mustn’t use such
      disrespectable words to your lawful grandfather. I shall whip you.”
    

      “Do whip me, grandfather, do; beat me like Sidor’s goat, but
      only take me to mammy, for God’s mercy!...”
    

      “Come, come, grandson, come!” the coachman said kindly.
      “It’s all right, don’t be frightened....I am frightened
      myself.... Say your prayers!”
    

      The door creaked and the porter’s head appeared. “Aren’t
      you asleep, Stepan?” he asked. “I shan’t get any sleep
      all night,” he said, coming in. “I shall be opening and
      shutting the gates all night.... What are you crying for, Alyoshka?”
    

      “He is frightened,” the coachman answered for his grandson.
    

      Again there was the sound of a wailing voice in the air. The porter said:
    

      “They are crying. The mother can’t believe her eyes.... It’s
      dreadful how upset she is.”
    

      “And is the father there?”
    

      “Yes.... The father is all right. He sits in the corner and says
      nothing. They have taken the children to relations.... Well, Stepan, shall
      we have a game of trumps?”
    

      “Yes,” the coachman agreed, scratching himself, “and
      you, Alyoshka, go to sleep. Almost big enough to be married, and
      blubbering, you rascal. Come, go along, grandson, go along....”
    

      The presence of the porter reassured Alyoshka. He went, not very
      resolutely, towards the sledge and lay down. And while he was falling
      asleep he heard a half-whisper.
    

      “I beat and cover,” said his grandfather.
    

      “I beat and cover,” repeated the porter.
    

      The bell rang in the yard, the door creaked and seemed also saying:
      “I beat and cover.” When Alyoshka dreamed of the gentleman
      and, frightened by his eyes, jumped up and burst out crying, it was
      morning, his grandfather was snoring, and the coach-house no longer seemed
      terrible.
    







      PANIC FEARS
    

DURING all the
      years I have been living in this world I have only three times been
      terrified.
    

      The first real terror, which made my hair stand on end and made shivers
      run all over me, was caused by a trivial but strange phenomenon. It
      happened that, having nothing to do one July evening, I drove to the
      station for the newspapers. It was a still, warm, almost sultry evening,
      like all those monotonous evenings in July which, when once they have set
      in, go on for a week, a fortnight, or sometimes longer, in regular
      unbroken succession, and are suddenly cut short by a violent thunderstorm
      and a lavish downpour of rain that refreshes everything for a long time.
    

      The sun had set some time before, and an unbroken gray dusk lay all over
      the land. The mawkishly sweet scents of the grass and flowers were heavy
      in the motionless, stagnant air.
    

      I was driving in a rough trolley. Behind my back the gardener’s son
      Pashka, a boy of eight years old, whom I had taken with me to look after
      the horse in case of necessity, was gently snoring, with his head on a
      sack of oats. Our way lay along a narrow by-road, straight as a ruler,
      which lay hid like a great snake in the tall thick rye. There was a pale
      light from the afterglow of sunset; a streak of light cut its way through
      a narrow, uncouth-looking cloud, which seemed sometimes like a boat and
      sometimes like a man wrapped in a quilt....
    

      I had driven a mile and a half, or two miles, when against the pale
      background of the evening glow there came into sight one after another
      some graceful tall poplars; a river glimmered beyond them, and a gorgeous
      picture suddenly, as though by magic, lay stretched before me. I had to
      stop the horse, for our straight road broke off abruptly and ran down a
      steep incline overgrown with bushes. We were standing on the hillside and
      beneath us at the bottom lay a huge hole full of twilight, of fantastic
      shapes, and of space. At the bottom of this hole, in a wide plain guarded
      by the poplars and caressed by the gleaming river, nestled a village. It
      was now sleeping.... Its huts, its church with the belfry, its trees,
      stood out against the gray twilight and were reflected darkly in the
      smooth surface of the river.
    

      I waked Pashka for fear he should fall out and began cautiously going
      down.
    

      “Have we got to Lukovo?” asked Pashka, lifting his head
      lazily.
    

      “Yes. Hold the reins!...”
    

      I led the horse down the hill and looked at the village. At the first
      glance one strange circumstance caught my attention: at the very top of
      the belfry, in the tiny window between the cupola and the bells, a light
      was twinkling. This light was like that of a smoldering lamp, at one
      moment dying down, at another flickering up. What could it come from?
    

      Its source was beyond my comprehension. It could not be burning at the
      window, for there were neither ikons nor lamps in the top turret of the
      belfry; there was nothing there, as I knew, but beams, dust, and spiders’
      webs. It was hard to climb up into that turret, for the passage to it from
      the belfry was closely blocked up.
    

      It was more likely than anything else to be the reflection of some outside
      light, but though I strained my eyes to the utmost, I could not see one
      other speck of light in the vast expanse that lay before me. There was no
      moon. The pale and, by now, quite dim streak of the afterglow could not
      have been reflected, for the window looked not to the west, but to the
      east. These and other similar considerations were straying through my mind
      all the while that I was going down the slope with the horse. At the
      bottom I sat down by the roadside and looked again at the light. As before
      it was glimmering and flaring up.
    

      “Strange,” I thought, lost in conjecture. “Very strange.”
    

      And little by little I was overcome by an unpleasant feeling. At first I
      thought that this was vexation at not being able to explain a simple
      phenomenon; but afterwards, when I suddenly turned away from the light in
      horror and caught hold of Pashka with one hand, it became clear that I was
      overcome with terror....
    

      I was seized with a feeling of loneliness, misery, and horror, as though I
      had been flung down against my will into this great hole full of shadows,
      where I was standing all alone with the belfry looking at me with its red
      eye.
    

      “Pashka!” I cried, closing my eyes in horror.
    

      “Well?”
    

      “Pashka, what’s that gleaming on the belfry?”
    

      Pashka looked over my shoulder at the belfry and gave a yawn.
    

      “Who can tell?”
    

      This brief conversation with the boy reassured me for a little, but not
      for long. Pashka, seeing my uneasiness, fastened his big eyes upon the
      light, looked at me again, then again at the light....
    

      “I am frightened,” he whispered.
    

      At this point, beside myself with terror, I clutched the boy with one
      hand, huddled up to him, and gave the horse a violent lash.
    

      “It’s stupid!” I said to myself. “That phenomenon
      is only terrible because I don’t understand it; everything we don’t
      understand is mysterious.”
    

      I tried to persuade myself, but at the same time I did not leave off
      lashing the horse. When we reached the posting station I purposely stayed
      for a full hour chatting with the overseer, and read through two or three
      newspapers, but the feeling of uneasiness did not leave me. On the way
      back the light was not to be seen, but on the other hand the silhouettes
      of the huts, of the poplars, and of the hill up which I had to drive,
      seemed to me as though animated. And why the light was there I don’t
      know to this day.
    

      The second terror I experienced was excited by a circumstance no less
      trivial.... I was returning from a romantic interview. It was one o’clock
      at night, the time when nature is buried in the soundest, sweetest sleep
      before the dawn. That time nature was not sleeping, and one could not call
      the night a still one. Corncrakes, quails, nightingales, and woodcocks
      were calling, crickets and grasshoppers were chirruping. There was a light
      mist over the grass, and clouds were scurrying straight ahead across the
      sky near the moon. Nature was awake, as though afraid of missing the best
      moments of her life.
    

      I walked along a narrow path at the very edge of a railway embankment. The
      moonlight glided over the lines which were already covered with dew. Great
      shadows from the clouds kept flitting over the embankment. Far ahead, a
      dim green light was glimmering peacefully.
    

      “So everything is well,” I thought, looking at them.
    

      I had a quiet, peaceful, comfortable feeling in my heart. I was returning
      from a tryst, I had no need to hurry; I was not sleepy, and I was
      conscious of youth and health in every sigh, every step I took, rousing a
      dull echo in the monotonous hum of the night. I don’t know what I
      was feeling then, but I remember I was happy, very happy.
    

      I had gone not more than three-quarters of a mile when I suddenly heard
      behind me a monotonous sound, a rumbling, rather like the roar of a great
      stream. It grew louder and louder every second, and sounded nearer and
      nearer. I looked round; a hundred paces from me was the dark copse from
      which I had only just come; there the embankment turned to the right in a
      graceful curve and vanished among the trees. I stood still in perplexity
      and waited. A huge black body appeared at once at the turn, noisily darted
      towards me, and with the swiftness of a bird flew past me along the rails.
      Less than half a minute passed and the blur had vanished, the rumble
      melted away into the noise of the night.
    

      It was an ordinary goods truck. There was nothing peculiar about it in
      itself, but its appearance without an engine and in the night puzzled me.
      Where could it have come from and what force sent it flying so rapidly
      along the rails? Where did it come from and where was it flying to?
    

      If I had been superstitious I should have made up my mind it was a party
      of demons and witches journeying to a devils’ sabbath, and should
      have gone on my way; but as it was, the phenomenon was absolutely
      inexplicable to me. I did not believe my eyes, and was entangled in
      conjectures like a fly in a spider’s web....
    

      I suddenly realized that I was utterly alone on the whole vast plain; that
      the night, which by now seemed inhospitable, was peeping into my face and
      dogging my footsteps; all the sounds, the cries of the birds, the
      whisperings of the trees, seemed sinister, and existing simply to alarm my
      imagination. I dashed on like a madman, and without realizing what I was
      doing I ran, trying to run faster and faster. And at once I heard
      something to which I had paid no attention before: that is, the plaintive
      whining of the telegraph wires.
    

      “This is beyond everything,” I said, trying to shame myself.
      “It’s cowardice! it’s silly!”
    

      But cowardice was stronger than common sense. I only slackened my pace
      when I reached the green light, where I saw a dark signal-box, and near it
      on the embankment the figure of a man, probably the signalman.
    

      “Did you see it?” I asked breathlessly.
    

      “See whom? What?”
    

      “Why, a truck ran by.”
    

      “I saw it,...” the peasant said reluctantly. “It broke
      away from the goods train. There is an incline at the ninetieth mile...;
      the train is dragged uphill. The coupling on the last truck gave way, so
      it broke off and ran back.... There is no catching it now!...”
    

      The strange phenomenon was explained and its fantastic character vanished.
      My panic was over and I was able to go on my way.
    

      My third fright came upon me as I was going home from stand shooting in
      early spring. It was in the dusk of evening. The forest road was covered
      with pools from a recent shower of rain, and the earth squelched under one’s
      feet. The crimson glow of sunset flooded the whole forest, coloring the
      white stems of the birches and the young leaves. I was exhausted and could
      hardly move.
    

      Four or five miles from home, walking along the forest road, I suddenly
      met a big black dog of the water spaniel breed. As he ran by, the dog
      looked intently at me, straight in my face, and ran on.
    

      “A nice dog!” I thought. “Whose is it?”
    

      I looked round. The dog was standing ten paces off with his eyes fixed on
      me. For a minute we scanned each other in silence, then the dog, probably
      flattered by my attention, came slowly up to me and wagged his tail.
    

      I walked on, the dog following me.
    

      “Whose dog can it be?” I kept asking myself. “Where does
      he come from?”
    

      I knew all the country gentry for twenty or thirty miles round, and knew
      all their dogs. Not one of them had a spaniel like that. How did he come
      to be in the depths of the forest, on a track used for nothing but carting
      timber? He could hardly have dropped behind someone passing through, for
      there was nowhere for the gentry to drive to along that road.
    

      I sat down on a stump to rest, and began scrutinizing my companion. He,
      too, sat down, raised his head, and fastened upon me an intent stare. He
      gazed at me without bHlinking. I don’t know whether it was the
      influence of the stillness, the shadows and sounds of the forest, or
      perhaps a result of exhaustion, but I suddenly felt uneasy under the
      steady gaze of his ordinary doggy eyes. I thought of Faust and his
      bulldog, and of the fact that nervous people sometimes when exhausted have
      hallucinations. That was enough to make me get up hurriedly and hurriedly
      walk on. The dog followed me.
    

      “Go away!” I shouted.
    

      The dog probably liked my voice, for he gave a gleeful jump and ran about
      in front of me.
    

      “Go away!” I shouted again.
    

      The dog looked round, stared at me intently, and wagged his tail
      good-humoredly. Evidently my threatening tone amused him. I ought to have
      patted him, but I could not get Faust’s dog out of my head, and the
      feeling of panic grew more and more acute... Darkness was coming on, which
      completed my confusion, and every time the dog ran up to me and hit me
      with his tail, like a coward I shut my eyes. The same thing happened as
      with the light in the belfry and the truck on the railway: I could not
      stand it and rushed away.
    

      At home I found a visitor, an old friend, who, after greeting me, began to
      complain that as he was driving to me he had lost his way in the forest,
      and a splendid valuable dog of his had dropped behind.
    







      THE BET
    

IT WAS a dark
      autumn night. The old banker was walking up and down his study and
      remembering how, fifteen years before, he had given a party one autumn
      evening. There had been many clever men there, and there had been
      interesting conversations. Among other things they had talked of capital
      punishment. The majority of the guests, among whom were many journalists
      and intellectual men, disapproved of the death penalty. They considered
      that form of punishment out of date, immoral, and unsuitable for Christian
      States. In the opinion of some of them the death penalty ought to be
      replaced everywhere by imprisonment for life.
    

      “I don’t agree with you,” said their host the banker.
      “I have not tried either the death penalty or imprisonment for life,
      but if one may judge a priori, the death penalty is more moral and
      more humane than imprisonment for life. Capital punishment kills a man at
      once, but lifelong imprisonment kills him slowly. Which executioner is the
      more humane, he who kills you in a few minutes or he who drags the life
      out of you in the course of many years?”
    

      “Both are equally immoral,” observed one of the guests,
      “for they both have the same object—to take away life. The
      State is not God. It has not the right to take away what it cannot restore
      when it wants to.”
    

      Among the guests was a young lawyer, a young man of five-and-twenty. When
      he was asked his opinion, he said:
    

      “The death sentence and the life sentence are equally immoral, but
      if I had to choose between the death penalty and imprisonment for life, I
      would certainly choose the second. To live anyhow is better than not at
      all.”
    

      A lively discussion arose. The banker, who was younger and more nervous in
      those days, was suddenly carried away by excitement; he struck the table
      with his fist and shouted at the young man:
    

      “It’s not true! I’ll bet you two millions you wouldn’t
      stay in solitary confinement for five years.”
    

      “If you mean that in earnest,” said the young man, “I’ll
      take the bet, but I would stay not five but fifteen years.”
    

      “Fifteen? Done!” cried the banker. “Gentlemen, I stake
      two millions!”
    

      “Agreed! You stake your millions and I stake my freedom!” said
      the young man.
    

      And this wild, senseless bet was carried out! The banker, spoilt and
      frivolous, with millions beyond his reckoning, was delighted at the bet.
      At supper he made fun of the young man, and said:
    

      “Think better of it, young man, while there is still time. To me two
      millions are a trifle, but you are losing three or four of the best years
      of your life. I say three or four, because you won’t stay longer.
      Don’t forget either, you unhappy man, that voluntary confinement is
      a great deal harder to bear than compulsory. The thought that you have the
      right to step out in liberty at any moment will poison your whole
      existence in prison. I am sorry for you.”
    

      And now the banker, walking to and fro, remembered all this, and asked
      himself: “What was the object of that bet? What is the good of that
      man’s losing fifteen years of his life and my throwing away two
      millions? Can it prove that the death penalty is better or worse than
      imprisonment for life? No, no. It was all nonsensical and meaningless. On
      my part it was the caprice of a pampered man, and on his part simple greed
      for money....”
    

      Then he remembered what followed that evening. It was decided that the
      young man should spend the years of his captivity under the strictest
      supervision in one of the lodges in the banker’s garden. It was
      agreed that for fifteen years he should not be free to cross the threshold
      of the lodge, to see human beings, to hear the human voice, or to receive
      letters and newspapers. He was allowed to have a musical instrument and
      books, and was allowed to write letters, to drink wine, and to smoke. By
      the terms of the agreement, the only relations he could have with the
      outer world were by a little window made purposely for that object. He
      might have anything he wanted—books, music, wine, and so on—in
      any quantity he desired by writing an order, but could only receive them
      through the window. The agreement provided for every detail and every
      trifle that would make his imprisonment strictly solitary, and bound the
      young man to stay there exactly fifteen years, beginning from
      twelve o’clock of November 14, 1870, and ending at twelve o’clock
      of November 14, 1885. The slightest attempt on his part to break the
      conditions, if only two minutes before the end, released the banker from
      the obligation to pay him two millions.
    

      For the first year of his confinement, as far as one could judge from his
      brief notes, the prisoner suffered severely from loneliness and
      depression. The sounds of the piano could be heard continually day and
      night from his lodge. He refused wine and tobacco. Wine, he wrote, excites
      the desires, and desires are the worst foes of the prisoner; and besides,
      nothing could be more dreary than drinking good wine and seeing no one.
      And tobacco spoilt the air of his room. In the first year the books he
      sent for were principally of a light character; novels with a complicated
      love plot, sensational and fantastic stories, and so on.
    

      In the second year the piano was silent in the lodge, and the prisoner
      asked only for the classics. In the fifth year music was audible again,
      and the prisoner asked for wine. Those who watched him through the window
      said that all that year he spent doing nothing but eating and drinking and
      lying on his bed, frequently yawning and angrily talking to himself. He
      did not read books. Sometimes at night he would sit down to write; he
      would spend hours writing, and in the morning tear up all that he had
      written. More than once he could be heard crying.
    

      In the second half of the sixth year the prisoner began zealously studying
      languages, philosophy, and history. He threw himself eagerly into these
      studies—so much so that the banker had enough to do to get him the
      books he ordered. In the course of four years some six hundred volumes
      were procured at his request. It was during this period that the banker
      received the following letter from his prisoner:
    

      “My dear Jailer, I write you these lines in six languages. Show them
      to people who know the languages. Let them read them. If they find not one
      mistake I implore you to fire a shot in the garden. That shot will show me
      that my efforts have not been thrown away. The geniuses of all ages and of
      all lands speak different languages, but the same flame burns in them all.
      Oh, if you only knew what unearthly happiness my soul feels now from being
      able to understand them!” The prisoner’s desire was fulfilled.
      The banker ordered two shots to be fired in the garden.
    

      Then after the tenth year, the prisoner sat immovably at the table and
      read nothing but the Gospel. It seemed strange to the banker that a man
      who in four years had mastered six hundred learned volumes should waste
      nearly a year over one thin book easy of comprehension. Theology and
      histories of religion followed the Gospels.
    

      In the last two years of his confinement the prisoner read an immense
      quantity of books quite indiscriminately. At one time he was busy with the
      natural sciences, then he would ask for Byron or Shakespeare. There were
      notes in which he demanded at the same time books on chemistry, and a
      manual of medicine, and a novel, and some treatise on philosophy or
      theology. His reading suggested a man swimming in the sea among the
      wreckage of his ship, and trying to save his life by greedily clutching
      first at one spar and then at another.
    

      II
    

      The old banker remembered all this, and thought:
    

      “To-morrow at twelve o’clock he will regain his freedom. By
      our agreement I ought to pay him two millions. If I do pay him, it is all
      over with me: I shall be utterly ruined.”
    

      Fifteen years before, his millions had been beyond his reckoning; now he
      was afraid to ask himself which were greater, his debts or his assets.
      Desperate gambling on the Stock Exchange, wild speculation and the
      excitability which he could not get over even in advancing years, had by
      degrees led to the decline of his fortune and the proud, fearless,
      self-confident millionaire had become a banker of middling rank, trembling
      at every rise and fall in his investments. “Cursed bet!”
      muttered the old man, clutching his head in despair. “Why didn’t
      the man die? He is only forty now. He will take my last penny from me, he
      will marry, will enjoy life, will gamble on the Exchange; while I shall
      look at him with envy like a beggar, and hear from him every day the same
      sentence: ‘I am indebted to you for the happiness of my life, let me
      help you!’ No, it is too much! The one means of being saved from
      bankruptcy and disgrace is the death of that man!”
    

      It struck three o’clock, the banker listened; everyone was asleep in
      the house and nothing could be heard outside but the rustling of the
      chilled trees. Trying to make no noise, he took from a fireproof safe the
      key of the door which had not been opened for fifteen years, put on his
      overcoat, and went out of the house.
    

      It was dark and cold in the garden. Rain was falling. A damp cutting wind
      was racing about the garden, howling and giving the trees no rest. The
      banker strained his eyes, but could see neither the earth nor the white
      statues, nor the lodge, nor the trees. Going to the spot where the lodge
      stood, he twice called the watchman. No answer followed. Evidently the
      watchman had sought shelter from the weather, and was now asleep somewhere
      either in the kitchen or in the greenhouse.
    

      “If I had the pluck to carry out my intention,” thought the
      old man, “suspicion would fall first upon the watchman.”
    

      He felt in the darkness for the steps and the door, and went into the
      entry of the lodge. Then he groped his way into a little passage and
      lighted a match. There was not a soul there. There was a bedstead with no
      bedding on it, and in the corner there was a dark cast-iron stove. The
      seals on the door leading to the prisoner’s rooms were intact.
    

      When the match went out the old man, trembling with emotion, peeped
      through the little window. A candle was burning dimly in the prisoner’s
      room. He was sitting at the table. Nothing could be seen but his back, the
      hair on his head, and his hands. Open books were lying on the table, on
      the two easy-chairs, and on the carpet near the table.
    

      Five minutes passed and the prisoner did not once stir. Fifteen years’
      imprisonment had taught him to sit still. The banker tapped at the window
      with his finger, and the prisoner made no movement whatever in response.
      Then the banker cautiously broke the seals off the door and put the key in
      the keyhole. The rusty lock gave a grating sound and the door creaked. The
      banker expected to hear at once footsteps and a cry of astonishment, but
      three minutes passed and it was as quiet as ever in the room. He made up
      his mind to go in.
    

      At the table a man unlike ordinary people was sitting motionless. He was a
      skeleton with the skin drawn tight over his bones, with long curls like a
      woman’s and a shaggy beard. His face was yellow with an earthy tint
      in it, his cheeks were hollow, his back long and narrow, and the hand on
      which his shaggy head was propped was so thin and delicate that it was
      dreadful to look at it. His hair was already streaked with silver, and
      seeing his emaciated, aged-looking face, no one would have believed that
      he was only forty. He was asleep.... In front of his bowed head there lay
      on the table a sheet of paper on which there was something written in fine
      handwriting.
    

      “Poor creature!” thought the banker, “he is asleep and
      most likely dreaming of the millions. And I have only to take this
      half-dead man, throw him on the bed, stifle him a little with the pillow,
      and the most conscientious expert would find no sign of a violent death.
      But let us first read what he has written here....”
    

      The banker took the page from the table and read as follows:
    

      “To-morrow at twelve o’clock I regain my freedom and the right
      to associate with other men, but before I leave this room and see the
      sunshine, I think it necessary to say a few words to you. With a clear
      conscience I tell you, as before God, who beholds me, that I despise
      freedom and life and health, and all that in your books is called the good
      things of the world.
    

      “For fifteen years I have been intently studying earthly life. It is
      true I have not seen the earth nor men, but in your books I have drunk
      fragrant wine, I have sung songs, I have hunted stags and wild boars in
      the forests, have loved women.... Beauties as ethereal as clouds, created
      by the magic of your poets and geniuses, have visited me at night, and
      have whispered in my ears wonderful tales that have set my brain in a
      whirl. In your books I have climbed to the peaks of Elburz and Mont Blanc,
      and from there I have seen the sun rise and have watched it at evening
      flood the sky, the ocean, and the mountain-tops with gold and crimson. I
      have watched from there the lightning flashing over my head and cleaving
      the storm-clouds. I have seen green forests, fields, rivers, lakes, towns.
      I have heard the singing of the sirens, and the strains of the shepherds’
      pipes; I have touched the wings of comely devils who flew down to converse
      with me of God.... In your books I have flung myself into the bottomless
      pit, performed miracles, slain, burned towns, preached new religions,
      conquered whole kingdoms....
    

      “Your books have given me wisdom. All that the unresting thought of
      man has created in the ages is compressed into a small compass in my
      brain. I know that I am wiser than all of you.
    

      “And I despise your books, I despise wisdom and the blessings of
      this world. It is all worthless, fleeting, illusory, and deceptive, like a
      mirage. You may be proud, wise, and fine, but death will wipe you off the
      face of the earth as though you were no more than mice burrowing under the
      floor, and your posterity, your history, your immortal geniuses will burn
      or freeze together with the earthly globe.
    

      “You have lost your reason and taken the wrong path. You have taken
      lies for truth, and hideousness for beauty. You would marvel if, owing to
      strange events of some sorts, frogs and lizards suddenly grew on apple and
      orange trees instead of fruit, or if roses began to smell like a sweating
      horse; so I marvel at you who exchange heaven for earth. I don’t
      want to understand you.
    

      “To prove to you in action how I despise all that you live by, I
      renounce the two millions of which I once dreamed as of paradise and which
      now I despise. To deprive myself of the right to the money I shall go out
      from here five hours before the time fixed, and so break the compact....”
    

      When the banker had read this he laid the page on the table, kissed the
      strange man on the head, and went out of the lodge, weeping. At no other
      time, even when he had lost heavily on the Stock Exchange, had he felt so
      great a contempt for himself. When he got home he lay on his bed, but his
      tears and emotion kept him for hours from sleeping.
    

      Next morning the watchmen ran in with pale faces, and told him they had
      seen the man who lived in the lodge climb out of the window into the
      garden, go to the gate, and disappear. The banker went at once with the
      servants to the lodge and made sure of the flight of his prisoner. To
      avoid arousing unnecessary talk, he took from the table the writing in
      which the millions were renounced, and when he got home locked it up in
      the fireproof safe.
    







      THE HEAD-GARDENER’S STORY
    

A SALE of flowers
      was taking place in Count N.‘s greenhouses. The purchasers were few
      in number—a landowner who was a neighbor of mine, a young
      timber-merchant, and myself. While the workmen were carrying out our
      magnificent purchases and packing them into the carts, we sat at the entry
      of the greenhouse and chatted about one thing and another. It is extremely
      pleasant to sit in a garden on a still April morning, listening to the
      birds, and watching the flowers brought out into the open air and basking
      in the sunshine.
    

      The head-gardener, Mihail Karlovitch, a venerable old man with a full
      shaven face, wearing a fur waistcoat and no coat, superintended the
      packing of the plants himself, but at the same time he listened to our
      conversation in the hope of hearing something new. He was an intelligent,
      very good-hearted man, respected by everyone. He was for some reason
      looked upon by everyone as a German, though he was in reality on his
      father’s side Swedish, on his mother’s side Russian, and
      attended the Orthodox church. He knew Russian, Swedish, and German. He had
      read a good deal in those languages, and nothing one could do gave him
      greater pleasure than lending him some new book or talking to him, for
      instance, about Ibsen.
    

      He had his weaknesses, but they were innocent ones: he called himself the
      head gardener, though there were no under-gardeners; the expression of his
      face was unusually dignified and haughty; he could not endure to be
      contradicted, and liked to be listened to with respect and attention.
    

      “That young fellow there I can recommend to you as an awful rascal,”
      said my neighbor, pointing to a laborer with a swarthy, gipsy face, who
      drove by with the water-barrel. “Last week he was tried in the town
      for burglary and was acquitted; they pronounced him mentally deranged, and
      yet look at him, he is the picture of health. Scoundrels are very often
      acquitted nowadays in Russia on grounds of abnormality and aberration, yet
      these acquittals, these unmistakable proofs of an indulgent attitude to
      crime, lead to no good. They demoralize the masses, the sense of justice
      is blunted in all as they become accustomed to seeing vice unpunished, and
      you know in our age one may boldly say in the words of Shakespeare that in
      our evil and corrupt age virtue must ask forgiveness of vice.”
    

      “That’s very true,” the merchant assented. “Owing
      to these frequent acquittals, murder and arson have become much more
      common. Ask the peasants.”
    

      Mihail Karlovitch turned towards us and said:
    

      “As far as I am concerned, gentlemen, I am always delighted to meet
      with these verdicts of not guilty. I am not afraid for morality and
      justice when they say ‘Not guilty,’ but on the contrary I feel
      pleased. Even when my conscience tells me the jury have made a mistake in
      acquitting the criminal, even then I am triumphant. Judge for yourselves,
      gentlemen; if the judges and the jury have more faith in man than
      in evidence, material proofs, and speeches for the prosecution, is not
      that faith in man in itself higher than any ordinary
      considerations? Such faith is only attainable by those few who understand
      and feel Christ.”
    

      “A fine thought,” I said.
    

      “But it’s not a new one. I remember a very long time ago I
      heard a legend on that subject. A very charming legend,” said the
      gardener, and he smiled. “I was told it by my grandmother, my father’s
      mother, an excellent old lady. She told me it in Swedish, and it does not
      sound so fine, so classical, in Russian.”
    

      But we begged him to tell it and not to be put off by the coarseness of
      the Russian language. Much gratified, he deliberately lighted his pipe,
      looked angrily at the laborers, and began:
    

      “There settled in a certain little town a solitary, plain, elderly
      gentleman called Thomson or Wilson—but that does not matter; the
      surname is not the point. He followed an honorable profession: he was a
      doctor. He was always morose and unsociable, and only spoke when required
      by his profession. He never visited anyone, never extended his
      acquaintance beyond a silent bow, and lived as humbly as a hermit. The
      fact was, he was a learned man, and in those days learned men were not
      like other people. They spent their days and nights in contemplation, in
      reading and in healing disease, looked upon everything else as trivial,
      and had no time to waste a word. The inhabitants of the town understood
      this, and tried not to worry him with their visits and empty chatter. They
      were very glad that God had sent them at last a man who could heal
      diseases, and were proud that such a remarkable man was living in their
      town. ‘He knows everything,’ they said about him.
    

      “But that was not enough. They ought to have also said, ‘He
      loves everyone.’ In the breast of that learned man there beat a
      wonderful angelic heart. Though the people of that town were strangers and
      not his own people, yet he loved them like children, and did not spare
      himself for them. He was himself ill with consumption, he had a cough, but
      when he was summoned to the sick he forgot his own illness he did not
      spare himself and, gasping for breath, climbed up the hills however high
      they might be. He disregarded the sultry heat and the cold, despised
      thirst and hunger. He would accept no money and strange to say, when one
      of his patients died, he would follow the coffin with the relations,
      weeping.
    

      “And soon he became so necessary to the town that the inhabitants
      wondered how they could have got on before without the man. Their
      gratitude knew no bounds. Grown-up people and children, good and bad
      alike, honest men and cheats—all in fact, respected him and knew his
      value. In the little town and all the surrounding neighborhood there was
      no man who would allow himself to do anything disagreeable to him; indeed,
      they would never have dreamed of it. When he came out of his lodging, he
      never fastened the doors or windows, in complete confidence that there was
      no thief who could bring himself to do him wrong. He often had in the
      course of his medical duties to walk along the highroads, through the
      forests and mountains haunted by numbers of hungry vagrants; but he felt
      that he was in perfect security.
    

      “One night he was returning from a patient when robbers fell upon
      him in the forest, but when they recognized him, they took off their hats
      respectfully and offered him something to eat. When he answered that he
      was not hungry, they gave him a warm wrap and accompanied him as far as
      the town, happy that fate had given them the chance in some small way to
      show their gratitude to the benevolent man. Well, to be sure, my
      grandmother told me that even the horses and the cows and the dogs knew
      him and expressed their joy when they met him.
    

      “And this man who seemed by his sanctity to have guarded himself
      from every evil, to whom even brigands and frenzied men wished nothing but
      good, was one fine morning found murdered. Covered with blood, with his
      skull broken, he was lying in a ravine, and his pale face wore an
      expression of amazement. Yes, not horror but amazement was the emotion
      that had been fixed upon his face when he saw the murderer before him. You
      can imagine the grief that overwhelmed the inhabitants of the town and the
      surrounding districts. All were in despair, unable to believe their eyes,
      wondering who could have killed the man. The judges who conducted the
      inquiry and examined the doctor’s body said: ‘Here we have all
      the signs of a murder, but as there is not a man in the world capable of
      murdering our doctor, obviously it was not a case of murder, and the
      combination of evidence is due to simple chance. We must suppose that in
      the darkness he fell into the ravine of himself and was mortally injured.’
    

      “The whole town agreed with this opinion. The doctor was buried, and
      nothing more was said about a violent death. The existence of a man who
      could have the baseness and wickedness to kill the doctor seemed
      incredible. There is a limit even to wickedness, isn’t there?
    

      “All at once, would you believe it, chance led them to discovering
      the murderer. A vagrant who had been many times convicted, notorious for
      his vicious life, was seen selling for drink a snuff-box and watch that
      had belonged to the doctor. When he was questioned he was confused, and
      answered with an obvious lie. A search was made, and in his bed was found
      a shirt with stains of blood on the sleeves, and a doctor’s lancet
      set in gold. What more evidence was wanted? They put the criminal in
      prison. The inhabitants were indignant, and at the same time said:
    

      “‘It’s incredible! It can’t be so! Take care that
      a mistake is not made; it does happen, you know, that evidence tells a
      false tale.’
    

      “At his trial the murderer obstinately denied his guilt. Everything
      was against him, and to be convinced of his guilt was as easy as to
      believe that this earth is black; but the judges seem to have gone mad:
      they weighed every proof ten times, looked distrustfully at the witnesses,
      flushed crimson and sipped water.... The trial began early in the morning
      and was only finished in the evening.
    

      “‘Accused!’ the chief judge said, addressing the
      murderer, ‘the court has found you guilty of murdering Dr.
      So-and-so, and has sentenced you to....’
    

      “The chief judge meant to say ‘to the death penalty,’
      but he dropped from his hands the paper on which the sentence was written,
      wiped the cold sweat from his face, and cried out:
    

      “‘No! May God punish me if I judge wrongly, but I swear he is
      not guilty. I cannot admit the thought that there exists a man who would
      dare to murder our friend the doctor! A man could not sink so low!’
    

      “‘There cannot be such a man!’ the other judges
      assented.
    

      “‘No,’ the crowd cried. ‘Let him go!’
    

      “The murderer was set free to go where he chose, and not one soul
      blamed the court for an unjust verdict. And my grandmother used to say
      that for such faith in humanity God forgave the sins of all the
      inhabitants of that town. He rejoices when people believe that man is His
      image and semblance, and grieves if, forgetful of human dignity, they
      judge worse of men than of dogs. The sentence of acquittal may bring harm
      to the inhabitants of the town, but on the other hand, think of the
      beneficial influence upon them of that faith in man—a faith which
      does not remain dead, you know; it raises up generous feelings in us, and
      always impels us to love and respect every man. Every man! And that is
      important.”
    

      Mihail Karlovitch had finished. My neighbor would have urged some
      objection, but the head-gardener made a gesture that signified that he did
      not like objections; then he walked away to the carts, and, with an
      expression of dignity, went on looking after the packing.
    







      THE BEAUTIES
    

      I
    

      I REMEMBER, when I was a high school boy in the fifth or sixth class, I
      was driving with my grandfather from the village of Bolshoe Kryepkoe in
      the Don region to Rostov-on-the-Don. It was a sultry, languidly dreary day
      of August. Our eyes were glued together, and our mouths were parched from
      the heat and the dry burning wind which drove clouds of dust to meet us;
      one did not want to look or speak or think, and when our drowsy driver, a
      Little Russian called Karpo, swung his whip at the horses and lashed me on
      my cap, I did not protest or utter a sound, but only, rousing myself from
      half-slumber, gazed mildly and dejectedly into the distance to see whether
      there was a village visible through the dust. We stopped to feed the
      horses in a big Armenian village at a rich Armenian’s whom my
      grandfather knew. Never in my life have I seen a greater caricature than
      that Armenian. Imagine a little shaven head with thick overhanging
      eyebrows, a beak of a nose, long gray mustaches, and a wide mouth with a
      long cherry-wood chibouk sticking out of it. This little head was clumsily
      attached to a lean hunch-back carcass attired in a fantastic garb, a short
      red jacket, and full bright blue trousers. This figure walked straddling
      its legs and shuffling with its slippers, spoke without taking the chibouk
      out of its mouth, and behaved with truly Armenian dignity, not smiling,
      but staring with wide-open eyes and trying to take as little notice as
      possible of its guests.
    

      There was neither wind nor dust in the Armenian’s rooms, but it was
      just as unpleasant, stifling, and dreary as in the steppe and on the road.
      I remember, dusty and exhausted by the heat, I sat in the corner on a
      green box. The unpainted wooden walls, the furniture, and the floors
      colored with yellow ocher smelt of dry wood baked by the sun. Wherever I
      looked there were flies and flies and flies.... Grandfather and the
      Armenian were talking about grazing, about manure, and about oats.... I
      knew that they would be a good hour getting the samovar; that grandfather
      would be not less than an hour drinking his tea, and then would lie down
      to sleep for two or three hours; that I should waste a quarter of the day
      waiting, after which there would be again the heat, the dust, the jolting
      cart. I heard the muttering of the two voices, and it began to seem to me
      that I had been seeing the Armenian, the cupboard with the crockery, the
      flies, the windows with the burning sun beating on them, for ages and
      ages, and should only cease to see them in the far-off future, and I was
      seized with hatred for the steppe, the sun, the flies....
    

      A Little Russian peasant woman in a kerchief brought in a tray of
      tea-things, then the samovar. The Armenian went slowly out into the
      passage and shouted: “Mashya, come and pour out tea! Where are you,
      Mashya?”
    

      Hurried footsteps were heard, and there came into the room a girl of
      sixteen in a simple cotton dress and a white kerchief. As she washed the
      crockery and poured out the tea, she was standing with her back to me, and
      all I could see was that she was of a slender figure, barefooted, and that
      her little bare heels were covered by long trousers.
    

      The Armenian invited me to have tea. Sitting down to the table, I glanced
      at the girl, who was handing me a glass of tea, and felt all at once as
      though a wind were blowing over my soul and blowing away all the
      impressions of the day with their dust and dreariness. I saw the
      bewitching features of the most beautiful face I have ever met in real
      life or in my dreams. Before me stood a beauty, and I recognized that at
      the first glance as I should have recognized lightning.
    

      I am ready to swear that Masha—or, as her father called her, Mashya—was
      a real beauty, but I don’t know how to prove it. It sometimes
      happens that clouds are huddled together in disorder on the horizon, and
      the sun hiding behind them colors them and the sky with tints of every
      possible shade—crimson, orange, gold, lilac, muddy pink; one cloud
      is like a monk, another like a fish, a third like a Turk in a turban. The
      glow of sunset enveloping a third of the sky gleams on the cross on the
      church, flashes on the windows of the manor house, is reflected in the
      river and the puddles, quivers on the trees; far, far away against the
      background of the sunset, a flock of wild ducks is flying homewards....
      And the boy herding the cows, and the surveyor driving in his chaise over
      the dam, and the gentleman out for a walk, all gaze at the sunset, and
      every one of them thinks it terribly beautiful, but no one knows or can
      say in what its beauty lies.
    

      I was not the only one to think the Armenian girl beautiful. My
      grandfather, an old man of seventy, gruff and indifferent to women and the
      beauties of nature, looked caressingly at Masha for a full minute, and
      asked:
    

      “Is that your daughter, Avert Nazaritch?”
    

      “Yes, she is my daughter,” answered the Armenian.
    

      “A fine young lady,” said my grandfather approvingly.
    

      An artist would have called the Armenian girl’s beauty classical and
      severe, it was just that beauty, the contemplation of which—God
      knows why!—inspires in one the conviction that one is seeing correct
      features; that hair, eyes, nose, mouth, neck, bosom, and every movement of
      the young body all go together in one complete harmonious accord in which
      nature has not blundered over the smallest line. You fancy for some reason
      that the ideally beautiful woman must have such a nose as Masha’s,
      straight and slightly aquiline, just such great dark eyes, such long
      lashes, such a languid glance; you fancy that her black curly hair and
      eyebrows go with the soft white tint of her brow and cheeks as the green
      reeds go with the quiet stream. Masha’s white neck and her youthful
      bosom were not fully developed, but you fancy the sculptor would need a
      great creative genius to mold them. You gaze, and little by little the
      desire comes over you to say to Masha something extraordinarily pleasant,
      sincere, beautiful, as beautiful as she herself was.
    

      At first I felt hurt and abashed that Masha took no notice of me, but was
      all the time looking down; it seemed to me as though a peculiar
      atmosphere, proud and happy, separated her from me and jealously screened
      her from my eyes.
    

      “That’s because I am covered with dust,” I thought,
      “am sunburnt, and am still a boy.”
    

      But little by little I forgot myself, and gave myself up entirely to the
      consciousness of beauty. I thought no more now of the dreary steppe, of
      the dust, no longer heard the buzzing of the flies, no longer tasted the
      tea, and felt nothing except that a beautiful girl was standing only the
      other side of the table.
    

      I felt this beauty rather strangely. It was not desire, nor ecstacy, nor
      enjoyment that Masha excited in me, but a painful though pleasant sadness.
      It was a sadness vague and undefined as a dream. For some reason I felt
      sorry for myself, for my grandfather and for the Armenian, even for the
      girl herself, and I had a feeling as though we all four had lost something
      important and essential to life which we should never find again. My
      grandfather, too, grew melancholy; he talked no more about manure or about
      oats, but sat silent, looking pensively at Masha.
    

      After tea my grandfather lay down for a nap while I went out of the house
      into the porch. The house, like all the houses in the Armenian village
      stood in the full sun; there was not a tree, not an awning, no shade. The
      Armenian’s great courtyard, overgrown with goosefoot and wild
      mallows, was lively and full of gaiety in spite of the great heat.
      Threshing was going on behind one of the low hurdles which intersected the
      big yard here and there. Round a post stuck into the middle of the
      threshing-floor ran a dozen horses harnessed side by side, so that they
      formed one long radius. A Little Russian in a long waistcoat and full
      trousers was walking beside them, cracking a whip and shouting in a tone
      that sounded as though he were jeering at the horses and showing off his
      power over them.
    

      “A—a—a, you damned brutes!... A—a—a, plague
      take you! Are you frightened?”
    

      The horses, sorrel, white, and piebald, not understanding why they were
      made to run round in one place and to crush the wheat straw, ran
      unwillingly as though with effort, swinging their tails with an offended
      air. The wind raised up perfect clouds of golden chaff from under their
      hoofs and carried it away far beyond the hurdle. Near the tall fresh
      stacks peasant women were swarming with rakes, and carts were moving, and
      beyond the stacks in another yard another dozen similar horses were
      running round a post, and a similar Little Russian was cracking his whip
      and jeering at the horses.
    

      The steps on which I was sitting were hot; on the thin rails and here and
      there on the window-frames sap was oozing out of the wood from the heat;
      red ladybirds were huddling together in the streaks of shadow under the
      steps and under the shutters. The sun was baking me on my head, on my
      chest, and on my back, but I did not notice it, and was conscious only of
      the thud of bare feet on the uneven floor in the passage and in the rooms
      behind me. After clearing away the tea-things, Masha ran down the steps,
      fluttering the air as she passed, and like a bird flew into a little grimy
      outhouse—I suppose the kitchen—from which came the smell of
      roast mutton and the sound of angry talk in Armenian. She vanished into
      the dark doorway, and in her place there appeared on the threshold an old
      bent, red-faced Armenian woman wearing green trousers. The old woman was
      angry and was scolding someone. Soon afterwards Masha appeared in the
      doorway, flushed with the heat of the kitchen and carrying a big black
      loaf on her shoulder; swaying gracefully under the weight of the bread,
      she ran across the yard to the threshing-floor, darted over the hurdle,
      and, wrapt in a cloud of golden chaff, vanished behind the carts. The
      Little Russian who was driving the horses lowered his whip, sank into
      silence, and gazed for a minute in the direction of the carts. Then when
      the Armenian girl darted again by the horses and leaped over the hurdle,
      he followed her with his eyes, and shouted to the horses in a tone as
      though he were greatly disappointed:
    

      “Plague take you, unclean devils!”
    

      And all the while I was unceasingly hearing her bare feet, and seeing how
      she walked across the yard with a grave, preoccupied face. She ran now
      down the steps, swishing the air about me, now into the kitchen, now to
      the threshing-floor, now through the gate, and I could hardly turn my head
      quickly enough to watch her.
    

      And the oftener she fluttered by me with her beauty, the more acute became
      my sadness. I felt sorry both for her and for myself and for the Little
      Russian, who mournfully watched her every time she ran through the cloud
      of chaff to the carts. Whether it was envy of her beauty, or that I was
      regretting that the girl was not mine, and never would be, or that I was a
      stranger to her; or whether I vaguely felt that her rare beauty was
      accidental, unnecessary, and, like everything on earth, of short duration;
      or whether, perhaps, my sadness was that peculiar feeling which is excited
      in man by the contemplation of real beauty, God only knows.
    

      The three hours of waiting passed unnoticed. It seemed to me that I had
      not had time to look properly at Masha when Karpo drove up to the river,
      bathed the horse, and began to put it in the shafts. The wet horse snorted
      with pleasure and kicked his hoofs against the shafts. Karpo shouted to
      it: “Ba—ack!” My grandfather woke up. Masha opened the
      creaking gates for us, we got into the chaise and drove out of the yard.
      We drove in silence as though we were angry with one another.
    

      When, two or three hours later, Rostov and Nahitchevan appeared in the
      distance, Karpo, who had been silent the whole time, looked round quickly,
      and said:
    

      “A fine wench, that at the Armenian’s.”
    

      And he lashed his horses.
    

      II
    

      Another time, after I had become a student, I was traveling by rail to the
      south. It was May. At one of the stations, I believe it was between
      Byelgorod and Harkov, I got out of the tram to walk about the platform.
    

      The shades of evening were already lying on the station garden, on the
      platform, and on the fields; the station screened off the sunset, but on
      the topmost clouds of smoke from the engine, which were tinged with rosy
      light, one could see the sun had not yet quite vanished.
    

      As I walked up and down the platform I noticed that the greater number of
      the passengers were standing or walking near a second-class compartment,
      and that they looked as though some celebrated person were in that
      compartment. Among the curious whom I met near this compartment I saw,
      however, an artillery officer who had been my fellow-traveler, an
      intelligent, cordial, and sympathetic fellow—as people mostly are
      whom we meet on our travels by chance and with whom we are not long
      acquainted.
    

      “What are you looking at there?” I asked.
    

      He made no answer, but only indicated with his eyes a feminine figure. It
      was a young girl of seventeen or eighteen, wearing a Russian dress, with
      her head bare and a little shawl flung carelessly on one shoulder; not a
      passenger, but I suppose a sister or daughter of the station-master. She
      was standing near the carriage window, talking to an elderly woman who was
      in the train. Before I had time to realize what I was seeing, I was
      suddenly overwhelmed by the feeling I had once experienced in the Armenian
      village.
    

      The girl was remarkably beautiful, and that was unmistakable to me and to
      those who were looking at her as I was.
    

      If one is to describe her appearance feature by feature, as the practice
      is, the only really lovely thing was her thick wavy fair hair, which hung
      loose with a black ribbon tied round her head; all the other features were
      either irregular or very ordinary. Either from a peculiar form of
      coquettishness, or from short-sightedness, her eyes were screwed up, her
      nose had an undecided tilt, her mouth was small, her profile was feebly
      and insipidly drawn, her shoulders were narrow and undeveloped for her age—and
      yet the girl made the impression of being really beautiful, and looking at
      her, I was able to feel convinced that the Russian face does not need
      strict regularity in order to be lovely; what is more, that if instead of
      her turn-up nose the girl had been given a different one, correct and
      plastically irreproachable like the Armenian girl’s, I fancy her
      face would have lost all its charm from the change.
    

      Standing at the window talking, the girl, shrugging at the evening damp,
      continually looking round at us, at one moment put her arms akimbo, at the
      next raised her hands to her head to straighten her hair, talked, laughed,
      while her face at one moment wore an expression of wonder, the next of
      horror, and I don’t remember a moment when her face and body were at
      rest. The whole secret and magic of her beauty lay just in these tiny,
      infinitely elegant movements, in her smile, in the play of her face, in
      her rapid glances at us, in the combination of the subtle grace of her
      movements with her youth, her freshness, the purity of her soul that
      sounded in her laugh and voice, and with the weakness we love so much in
      children, in birds, in fawns, and in young trees.
    

      It was that butterfly’s beauty so in keeping with waltzing, darting
      about the garden, laughter and gaiety, and incongruous with serious
      thought, grief, and repose; and it seemed as though a gust of wind blowing
      over the platform, or a fall of rain, would be enough to wither the
      fragile body and scatter the capricious beauty like the pollen of a
      flower.
    

      “So—o!...” the officer muttered with a sigh when, after
      the second bell, we went back to our compartment.
    

      And what that “So—o” meant I will not undertake to
      decide.
    

      Perhaps he was sad, and did not want to go away from the beauty and the
      spring evening into the stuffy train; or perhaps he, like me, was
      unaccountably sorry for the beauty, for himself, and for me, and for all
      the passengers, who were listlessly and reluctantly sauntering back to
      their compartments. As we passed the station window, at which a pale,
      red-haired telegraphist with upstanding curls and a faded, broad-cheeked
      face was sitting beside his apparatus, the officer heaved a sigh and said:
    

      “I bet that telegraphist is in love with that pretty girl. To live
      out in the wilds under one roof with that ethereal creature and not fall
      in love is beyond the power of man. And what a calamity, my friend! what
      an ironical fate, to be stooping, unkempt, gray, a decent fellow and not a
      fool, and to be in love with that pretty, stupid little girl who would
      never take a scrap of notice of you! Or worse still: imagine that
      telegraphist is in love, and at the same time married, and that his wife
      is as stooping, as unkempt, and as decent a person as himself.”
    

      On the platform between our carriage and the next the guard was standing
      with his elbows on the railing, looking in the direction of the beautiful
      girl, and his battered, wrinkled, unpleasantly beefy face, exhausted by
      sleepless nights and the jolting of the train, wore a look of tenderness
      and of the deepest sadness, as though in that girl he saw happiness, his
      own youth, soberness, purity, wife, children; as though he were repenting
      and feeling in his whole being that that girl was not his, and that for
      him, with his premature old age, his uncouthness, and his beefy face, the
      ordinary happiness of a man and a passenger was as far away as heaven....
    

      The third bell rang, the whistles sounded, and the train slowly moved off.
      First the guard, the station-master, then the garden, the beautiful girl
      with her exquisitely sly smile, passed before our windows....
    

      Putting my head out and looking back, I saw how, looking after the train,
      she walked along the platform by the window where the telegraph clerk was
      sitting, smoothed her hair, and ran into the garden. The station no longer
      screened off the sunset, the plain lay open before us, but the sun had
      already set and the smoke lay in black clouds over the green, velvety
      young corn. It was melancholy in the spring air, and in the darkening sky,
      and in the railway carriage.
    

      The familiar figure of the guard came into the carriage, and he began
      lighting the candles.
    







      THE SHOEMAKER AND THE DEVIL
    

IT was Christmas
      Eve. Marya had long been snoring on the stove; all the paraffin in the
      little lamp had burnt out, but Fyodor Nilov still sat at work. He would
      long ago have flung aside his work and gone out into the street, but a
      customer from Kolokolny Lane, who had a fortnight before ordered some
      boots, had been in the previous day, had abused him roundly, and had
      ordered him to finish the boots at once before the morning service.
    

      “It’s a convict’s life!” Fyodor grumbled as he
      worked. “Some people have been asleep long ago, others are enjoying
      themselves, while you sit here like some Cain and sew for the devil knows
      whom....”
    

      To save himself from accidentally falling asleep, he kept taking a bottle
      from under the table and drinking out of it, and after every pull at it he
      twisted his head and said aloud:
    

      “What is the reason, kindly tell me, that customers enjoy themselves
      while I am forced to sit and work for them? Because they have money and I
      am a beggar?”
    

      He hated all his customers, especially the one who lived in Kolokolny
      Lane. He was a gentleman of gloomy appearance, with long hair, a yellow
      face, blue spectacles, and a husky voice. He had a German name which one
      could not pronounce. It was impossible to tell what was his calling and
      what he did. When, a fortnight before, Fyodor had gone to take his
      measure, he, the customer, was sitting on the floor pounding something in
      a mortar. Before Fyodor had time to say good-morning the contents of the
      mortar suddenly flared up and burned with a bright red flame; there was a
      stink of sulphur and burnt feathers, and the room was filled with a thick
      pink smoke, so that Fyodor sneezed five times; and as he returned home
      afterwards, he thought: “Anyone who feared God would not have
      anything to do with things like that.”
    

      When there was nothing left in the bottle Fyodor put the boots on the
      table and sank into thought. He leaned his heavy head on his fist and
      began thinking of his poverty, of his hard life with no glimmer of light
      in it. Then he thought of the rich, of their big houses and their
      carriages, of their hundred-rouble notes.... How nice it would be if the
      houses of these rich men—the devil flay them!—were smashed, if
      their horses died, if their fur coats and sable caps got shabby! How
      splendid it would be if the rich, little by little, changed into beggars
      having nothing, and he, a poor shoemaker, were to become rich, and were to
      lord it over some other poor shoemaker on Christmas Eve.
    

      Dreaming like this, Fyodor suddenly thought of his work, and opened his
      eyes.
    

      “Here’s a go,” he thought, looking at the boots. “The
      job has been finished ever so long ago, and I go on sitting here. I must
      take the boots to the gentleman.”
    

      He wrapped up the work in a red handkerchief, put on his things, and went
      out into the street. A fine hard snow was falling, pricking the face as
      though with needles. It was cold, slippery, dark, the gas-lamps burned
      dimly, and for some reason there was a smell of paraffin in the street, so
      that Fyodor coughed and cleared his throat. Rich men were driving to and
      fro on the road, and every rich man had a ham and a bottle of vodka in his
      hands. Rich young ladies peeped at Fyodor out of the carriages and
      sledges, put out their tongues and shouted, laughing:
    

      “Beggar! Beggar!”
    

      Students, officers, and merchants walked behind Fyodor, jeering at him and
      crying:
    

      “Drunkard! Drunkard! Infidel cobbler! Soul of a boot-leg! Beggar!”
    

      All this was insulting, but Fyodor held his tongue and only spat in
      disgust. But when Kuzma Lebyodkin from Warsaw, a master-bootmaker, met him
      and said: “I’ve married a rich woman and I have men working
      under me, while you are a beggar and have nothing to eat,” Fyodor
      could not refrain from running after him. He pursued him till he found
      himself in Kolokolny Lane. His customer lived in the fourth house from the
      corner on the very top floor. To reach him one had to go through a long,
      dark courtyard, and then to climb up a very high slippery stair-case which
      tottered under one’s feet. When Fyodor went in to him he was sitting
      on the floor pounding something in a mortar, just as he had been the
      fortnight before.
    

      “Your honor, I have brought your boots,” said Fyodor sullenly.
    

      The customer got up and began trying on the boots in silence. Desiring to
      help him, Fyodor went down on one knee and pulled off his old, boot, but
      at once jumped up and staggered towards the door in horror. The customer
      had not a foot, but a hoof like a horse’s.
    

      “Aha!” thought Fyodor; “here’s a go!”
    

      The first thing should have been to cross himself, then to leave
      everything and run downstairs; but he immediately reflected that he was
      meeting a devil for the first and probably the last time, and not to take
      advantage of his services would be foolish. He controlled himself and
      determined to try his luck. Clasping his hands behind him to avoid making
      the sign of the cross, he coughed respectfully and began:
    

      “They say that there is nothing on earth more evil and impure than
      the devil, but I am of the opinion, your honor, that the devil is highly
      educated. He has—excuse my saying it—hoofs and a tail behind,
      but he has more brains than many a student.”
    

      “I like you for what you say,” said the devil, flattered.
      “Thank you, shoemaker! What do you want?”
    

      And without loss of time the shoemaker began complaining of his lot. He
      began by saying that from his childhood up he had envied the rich. He had
      always resented it that all people did not live alike in big houses and
      drive with good horses. Why, he asked, was he poor? How was he worse than
      Kuzma Lebyodkin from Warsaw, who had his own house, and whose wife wore a
      hat? He had the same sort of nose, the same hands, feet, head, and back,
      as the rich, and so why was he forced to work when others were enjoying
      themselves? Why was he married to Marya and not to a lady smelling of
      scent? He had often seen beautiful young ladies in the houses of rich
      customers, but they either took no notice of him whatever, or else
      sometimes laughed and whispered to each other: “What a red nose that
      shoemaker has!” It was true that Marya was a good, kind,
      hard-working woman, but she was not educated; her hand was heavy and hit
      hard, and if one had occasion to speak of politics or anything
      intellectual before her, she would put her spoke in and talk the most
      awful nonsense.
    

      “What do you want, then?” his customer interrupted him.
    

      “I beg you, your honor Satan Ivanitch, to be graciously pleased to
      make me a rich man.”
    

      “Certainly. Only for that you must give me up your soul! Before the
      cocks crow, go and sign on this paper here that you give me up your soul.”
    

      “Your honor,” said Fyodor politely, “when you ordered a
      pair of boots from me I did not ask for the money in advance. One has
      first to carry out the order and then ask for payment.”
    

      “Oh, very well!” the customer assented.
    

      A bright flame suddenly flared up in the mortar, a pink thick smoke came
      puffing out, and there was a smell of burnt feathers and sulphur. When the
      smoke had subsided, Fyodor rubbed his eyes and saw that he was no longer
      Fyodor, no longer a shoemaker, but quite a different man, wearing a
      waistcoat and a watch-chain, in a new pair of trousers, and that he was
      sitting in an armchair at a big table. Two foot men were handing him
      dishes, bowing low and saying:
    

      “Kindly eat, your honor, and may it do you good!”
    

      What wealth! The footmen handed him a big piece of roast mutton and a dish
      of cucumbers, and then brought in a frying-pan a roast goose, and a little
      afterwards boiled pork with horse-radish cream. And how dignified, how
      genteel it all was! Fyodor ate, and before each dish drank a big glass of
      excellent vodka, like some general or some count. After the pork he was
      handed some boiled grain moistened with goose fat, then an omelette with
      bacon fat, then fried liver, and he went on eating and was delighted. What
      more? They served, too, a pie with onion and steamed turnip with kvass.
    

      “How is it the gentry don’t burst with such meals?” he
      thought.
    

      In conclusion they handed him a big pot of honey. After dinner the devil
      appeared in blue spectacles and asked with a low bow:
    

      “Are you satisfied with your dinner, Fyodor Pantelyeitch?”
    

      But Fyodor could not answer one word, he was so stuffed after his dinner.
      The feeling of repletion was unpleasant, oppressive, and to distract his
      thoughts he looked at the boot on his left foot.
    

      “For a boot like that I used not to take less than seven and a half
      roubles. What shoemaker made it?” he asked.
    

      “Kuzma Lebyodkin,” answered the footman.
    

      “Send for him, the fool!”
    

      Kuzma Lebyodkin from Warsaw soon made his appearance. He stopped in a
      respectful attitude at the door and asked:
    

      “What are your orders, your honor?”
    

      “Hold your tongue!” cried Fyodor, and stamped his foot.
      “Don’t dare to argue; remember your place as a cobbler!
      Blockhead! You don’t know how to make boots! I’ll beat your
      ugly phiz to a jelly! Why have you come?”
    

      “For money.”
    

      “What money? Be off! Come on Saturday! Boy, give him a cuff!”
    

      But he at once recalled what a life the customers used to lead him, too,
      and he felt heavy at heart, and to distract his attention he took a fat
      pocketbook out of his pocket and began counting his money. There was a
      great deal of money, but Fyodor wanted more still. The devil in the blue
      spectacles brought him another notebook fatter still, but he wanted even
      more; and the more he counted it, the more discontented he became.
    

      In the evening the evil one brought him a full-bosomed lady in a red
      dress, and said that this was his new wife. He spent the whole evening
      kissing her and eating gingerbreads, and at night he went to bed on a
      soft, downy feather-bed, turned from side to side, and could not go to
      sleep. He felt uncanny.
    

      “We have a great deal of money,” he said to his wife; “we
      must look out or thieves will be breaking in. You had better go and look
      with a candle.”
    

      He did not sleep all night, and kept getting up to see if his box was all
      right. In the morning he had to go to church to matins. In church the same
      honor is done to rich and poor alike. When Fyodor was poor he used to pray
      in church like this: “God, forgive me, a sinner!” He said the
      same thing now though he had become rich. What difference was there? And
      after death Fyodor rich would not be buried in gold, not in diamonds, but
      in the same black earth as the poorest beggar. Fyodor would burn in the
      same fire as cobblers. Fyodor resented all this, and, too, he felt weighed
      down all over by his dinner, and instead of prayer he had all sorts of
      thoughts in his head about his box of money, about thieves, about his
      bartered, ruined soul.
    

      He came out of church in a bad temper. To drive away his unpleasant
      thoughts as he had often done before, he struck up a song at the top of
      his voice. But as soon as he began a policeman ran up and said, with his
      fingers to the peak of his cap:
    

      “Your honor, gentlefolk must not sing in the street! You are not a
      shoemaker!”
    

      Fyodor leaned his back against a fence and fell to thinking: what could he
      do to amuse himself?
    

      “Your honor,” a porter shouted to him, “don’t lean
      against the fence, you will spoil your fur coat!”
    

      Fyodor went into a shop and bought himself the very best concertina, then
      went out into the street playing it. Everybody pointed at him and laughed.
    

      “And a gentleman, too,” the cabmen jeered at him; “like
      some cobbler....”
    

      “Is it the proper thing for gentlefolk to be disorderly in the
      street?” a policeman said to him. “You had better go into a
      tavern!”
    

      “Your honor, give us a trifle, for Christ’s sake,” the
      beggars wailed, surrounding Fyodor on all sides.
    

      In earlier days when he was a shoemaker the beggars took no notice of him,
      now they wouldn’t let him pass.
    

      And at home his new wife, the lady, was waiting for him, dressed in a
      green blouse and a red skirt. He meant to be attentive to her, and had
      just lifted his arm to give her a good clout on the back, but she said
      angrily:
    

      “Peasant! Ignorant lout! You don’t know how to behave with
      ladies! If you love me you will kiss my hand; I don’t allow you to
      beat me.”
    

      “This is a blasted existence!” thought Fyodor. “People
      do lead a life! You mustn’t sing, you mustn’t play the
      concertina, you mustn’t have a lark with a lady.... Pfoo!”
    

      He had no sooner sat down to tea with the lady when the evil spirit in the
      blue spectacles appeared and said:
    

      “Come, Fyodor Pantelyeitch, I have performed my part of the bargain.
      Now sign your paper and come along with me!”
    

      And he dragged Fyodor to hell, straight to the furnace, and devils flew up
      from all directions and shouted:
    

      “Fool! Blockhead! Ass!”
    

      There was a fearful smell of paraffin in hell, enough to suffocate one.
      And suddenly it all vanished. Fyodor opened his eyes and saw his table,
      the boots, and the tin lamp. The lamp-glass was black, and from the faint
      light on the wick came clouds of stinking smoke as from a chimney. Near
      the table stood the customer in the blue spectacles, shouting angrily:
    

      “Fool! Blockhead! Ass! I’ll give you a lesson, you scoundrel!
      You took the order a fortnight ago and the boots aren’t ready yet!
      Do you suppose I want to come trapesing round here half a dozen times a
      day for my boots? You wretch! you brute!”
    

      Fyodor shook his head and set to work on the boots. The customer went on
      swearing and threatening him for a long time. At last when he subsided,
      Fyodor asked sullenly:
    

      “And what is your occupation, sir?”
    

      “I make Bengal lights and fireworks. I am a pyrotechnician.”
    

      They began ringing for matins. Fyodor gave the customer the boots, took
      the money for them, and went to church.
    

      Carriages and sledges with bearskin rugs were dashing to and fro in the
      street; merchants, ladies, officers were walking along the pavement
      together with the humbler folk.... But Fyodor did not envy them nor repine
      at his lot. It seemed to him now that rich and poor were equally badly
      off. Some were able to drive in a carriage, and others to sing songs at
      the top of their voice and to play the concertina, but one and the same
      thing, the same grave, was awaiting all alike, and there was nothing in
      life for which one would give the devil even a tiny scrap of one’s
      soul.
    

 


The Wife and Other Stories

 



  


THE WIFE


I

I RECEIVED the following letter:


“DEAR SIR, PAVEL ANDREITCH!


“Not far from you—that is to say, in the village of Pestrovo—very
distressing incidents are taking place, concerning which I feel it my duty
to write to you. All the peasants of that village sold their cottages and
all their belongings, and set off for the province of Tomsk, but did not
succeed in getting there, and have come back. Here, of course, they have
nothing now; everything belongs to other people. They have settled three
or four families in a hut, so that there are no less than fifteen persons
of both sexes in each hut, not counting the young children; and the long
and the short of it is, there is nothing to eat. There is famine and there
is a terrible pestilence of hunger, or spotted, typhus; literally every
one is stricken. The doctor’s assistant says one goes into a cottage and
what does one see? Every one is sick, every one delirious, some laughing,
others frantic; the huts are filthy; there is no one to fetch them water,
no one to give them a drink, and nothing to eat but frozen potatoes. What
can Sobol (our Zemstvo doctor) and his lady assistant do when more than
medicine the peasants need bread which they have not? The District Zemstvo
refuses to assist them, on the ground that their names have been taken off
the register of this district, and that they are now reckoned as
inhabitants of Tomsk; and, besides, the Zemstvo has no money.


“Laying these facts before you, and knowing your humanity, I beg you not
to refuse immediate help.


“Your well-wisher.”


Obviously the letter was written by the doctor with the animal name* or
his lady assistant. Zemstvo doctors and their assistants go on for years
growing more and more convinced every day that they can do nothing,
and yet continue to receive their salaries from people who are living upon
frozen potatoes, and consider they have a right to judge whether I am
humane or not.


*Sobol in Russian means “sable-marten.”—TRANSLATOR’S NOTE.


Worried by the anonymous letter and by the fact that peasants came every
morning to the servants’ kitchen and went down on their knees there, and
that twenty sacks of rye had been stolen at night out of the barn, the
wall having first been broken in, and by the general depression which was
fostered by conversations, newspapers, and horrible weather—worried
by all this, I worked listlessly and ineffectively. I was writing “A
History of Railways”; I had to read a great number of Russian and foreign
books, pamphlets, and articles in the magazines, to make calculations, to
refer to logarithms, to think and to write; then again to read, calculate,
and think; but as soon as I took up a book or began to think, my thoughts
were in a muddle, my eyes began bIlinking, I would get up from the table
with a sigh and begin walking about the big rooms of my deserted
country-house. When I was tired of walking about I would stand still at my
study window, and, looking across the wide courtyard, over the pond and
the bare young birch-trees and the great fields covered with recently
fallen, thawing snow, I saw on a low hill on the horizon a group of
mud-coloured huts from which a black muddy road ran down in an irregular
streak through the white field. That was Pestrovo, concerning which my
anonymous correspondent had written to me. If it had not been for the
crows who, foreseeing rain or snowy weather, floated cawing over the pond
and the fields, and the tapping in the carpenter’s shed, this bit of the
world about which such a fuss was being made would have seemed like the
Dead Sea; it was all so still, motionless, lifeless, and dreary!


My uneasiness hindered me from working and concentrating myself; I did not
know what it was, and chose to believe it was disappointment. I had
actually given up my post in the Department of Ways and Communications,
and had come here into the country expressly to live in peace and to
devote myself to writing on social questions. It had long been my
cherished dream. And now I had to say good-bye both to peace and to
literature, to give up everything and think only of the peasants. And that
was inevitable, because I was convinced that there was absolutely nobody
in the district except me to help the starving. The people surrounding me
were uneducated, unintellectual, callous, for the most part dishonest, or
if they were honest, they were unreasonable and unpractical like my wife,
for instance. It was impossible to rely on such people, it was impossible
to leave the peasants to their fate, so that the only thing left to do was
to submit to necessity and see to setting the peasants to rights myself.


I began by making up my mind to give five thousand roubles to the
assistance of the starving peasants. And that did not decrease, but only
aggravated my uneasiness. As I stood by the window or walked about the
rooms I was tormented by the question which had not occurred to me before:
how this money was to be spent. To have bread bought and to go from hut to
hut distributing it was more than one man could do, to say nothing of the
risk that in your haste you might give twice as much to one who was
well-fed or to one who was making money out of his fellows as to the
hungry. I had no faith in the local officials. All these district captains
and tax inspectors were young men, and I distrusted them as I do all young
people of today, who are materialistic and without ideals. The District
Zemstvo, the Peasant Courts, and all the local institutions, inspired in
me not the slightest desire to appeal to them for assistance. I knew that
all these institutions who were busily engaged in picking out plums from
the Zemstvo and the Government pie had their mouths always wide open for a
bite at any other pie that might turn up.


The idea occurred to me to invite the neighbouring landowners and suggest
to them to organize in my house something like a committee or a centre to
which all subscriptions could be forwarded, and from which assistance and
instructions could be distributed throughout the district; such an
organization, which would render possible frequent consultations and free
control on a big scale, would completely meet my views. But I imagined the
lunches, the dinners, the suppers and the noise, the waste of time, the
verbosity and the bad taste which that mixed provincial company would
inevitably bring into my house, and I made haste to reject my idea.


As for the members of my own household, the last thing I could look for
was help or support from them. Of my father’s household, of the household
of my childhood, once a big and noisy family, no one remained but the
governess Mademoiselle Marie, or, as she was now called, Marya
Gerasimovna, an absolutely insignificant person. She was a precise little
old lady of seventy, who wore a light grey dress and a cap with white
ribbons, and looked like a china doll. She always sat in the drawing-room
reading.


Whenever I passed by her, she would say, knowing the reason for my
brooding:


“What can you expect, Pasha? I told you how it would be before. You can
judge from our servants.”


My wife, Natalya Gavrilovna, lived on the lower storey, all the rooms of
which she occupied. She slept, had her meals, and received her visitors
downstairs in her own rooms, and took not the slightest interest in how I
dined, or slept, or whom I saw. Our relations with one another were simple
and not strained, but cold, empty, and dreary as relations are between
people who have been so long estranged, that even living under the same
roof gives no semblance of nearness. There was no trace now of the
passionate and tormenting love—at one time sweet, at another bitter
as wormwood—which I had once felt for Natalya Gavrilovna. There was
nothing left, either, of the outbursts of the past—the loud
altercations, upbraidings, complaints, and gusts of hatred which had
usually ended in my wife’s going abroad or to her own people, and in my
sending money in small but frequent instalments that I might sting her
pride oftener. (My proud and sensitive wife and her family live at my
expense, and much as she would have liked to do so, my wife could not
refuse my money: that afforded me satisfaction and was one comfort in my
sorrow.) Now when we chanced to meet in the corridor downstairs or in the
yard, I bowed, she smiled graciously. We spoke of the weather, said that
it seemed time to put in the double windows, and that some one with bells
on their harness had driven over the dam. And at such times I read in her
face: “I am faithful to you and am not disgracing your good name which you
think so much about; you are sensible and do not worry me; we are quits.”


I assured myself that my love had died long ago, that I was too much
absorbed in my work to think seriously of my relations with my wife. But,
alas! that was only what I imagined. When my wife talked aloud downstairs
I listened intently to her voice, though I could not distinguish one word.
When she played the piano downstairs I stood up and listened. When her
carriage or her saddlehorse was brought to the door, I went to the window
and waited to see her out of the house; then I watched her get into her
carriage or mount her horse and ride out of the yard. I felt that there
was something wrong with me, and was afraid the expression of my eyes or
my face might betray me. I looked after my wife and then watched for her
to come back that I might see again from the window her face, her
shoulders, her fur coat, her hat. I felt dreary, sad, infinitely
regretful, and felt inclined in her absence to walk through her rooms, and
longed that the problem that my wife and I had not been able to solve
because our characters were incompatible, should solve itself in the
natural way as soon as possible—that is, that this beautiful woman
of twenty-seven might make haste and grow old, and that my head might be
grey and bald.


One day at lunch my bailiff informed me that the Pestrovo peasants had
begun to pull the thatch off the roofs to feed their cattle. Marya
Gerasimovna looked at me in alarm and perplexity.


“What can I do?” I said to her. “One cannot fight single-handed, and I
have never experienced such loneliness as I do now. I would give a great
deal to find one man in the whole province on whom I could rely.”


“Invite Ivan Ivanitch,” said Marya Gerasimovna.


“To be sure!” I thought, delighted. “That is an idea! C’est raison,”
I hummed, going to my study to write to Ivan Ivanitch. “C’est raison,
c’est raison.”


II


Of all the mass of acquaintances who, in this house twenty-five to
thirty-five years ago, had eaten, drunk, masqueraded, fallen in love,
married, bored us with accounts of their splendid packs of hounds and
horses, the only one still living was Ivan Ivanitch Bragin. At one time he
had been very active, talkative, noisy, and given to falling in love, and
had been famous for his extreme views and for the peculiar charm of his
face, which fascinated men as well as women; now he was an old man, had
grown corpulent, and was living out his days with neither views nor charm.
He came the day after getting my letter, in the evening just as the
samovar was brought into the dining-room and little Marya Gerasimovna had
begun slicing the lemon.


“I am very glad to see you, my dear fellow,” I said gaily, meeting him.
“Why, you are stouter than ever....”


“It isn’t getting stout; it’s swelling,” he answered. “The bees must have
stung me.”


With the familiarity of a man laughing at his own fatness, he put his arms
round my waist and laid on my breast his big soft head, with the hair
combed down on the forehead like a Little Russian’s, and went off into a
thin, aged laugh.


“And you go on getting younger,” he said through his laugh. “I wonder what
dye you use for your hair and beard; you might let me have some of it.”
Sniffing and gasping, he embraced me and kissed me on the cheek. “You
might give me some of it,” he repeated. “Why, you are not forty, are you?”


“Alas, I am forty-six!” I said, laughing.


Ivan Ivanitch smelt of tallow candles and cooking, and that suited him.
His big, puffy, slow-moving body was swathed in a long frock-coat like a
coachman’s full coat, with a high waist, and with hooks and eyes instead
of buttons, and it would have been strange if he had smelt of
eau-de-Cologne, for instance. In his long, unshaven, bluish double chin,
which looked like a thistle, his goggle eyes, his shortness of breath, and
in the whole of his clumsy, slovenly figure, in his voice, his laugh, and
his words, it was difficult to recognize the graceful, interesting talker
who used in old days to make the husbands of the district jealous on
account of their wives.


“I am in great need of your assistance, my friend,” I said, when we were
sitting in the dining-room, drinking tea. “I want to organize relief for
the starving peasants, and I don’t know how to set about it. So perhaps
you will be so kind as to advise me.”


“Yes, yes, yes,” said Ivan Ivanitch, sighing. “To be sure, to be sure, to
be sure....”


“I would not have worried you, my dear fellow, but really there is no one
here but you I can appeal to. You know what people are like about here.”


“To be sure, to be sure, to be sure.... Yes.”


I thought that as we were going to have a serious, business consultation
in which any one might take part, regardless of their position or personal
relations, why should I not invite Natalya Gavrilovna.


“Tres faciunt collegium,” I said gaily. “What if we were to ask
Natalya Gavrilovna? What do you think? Fenya,” I said, turning to the
maid, “ask Natalya Gavrilovna to come upstairs to us, if possible at once.
Tell her it’s a very important matter.”


A little later Natalya Gavrilovna came in. I got up to meet her and said:


“Excuse us for troubling you, Natalie. We are discussing a very important
matter, and we had the happy thought that we might take advantage of your
good advice, which you will not refuse to give us. Please sit down.”


Ivan Ivanitch kissed her hand while she kissed his forehead; then, when we
all sat down to the table, he, looking at her tearfully and blissfully,
craned forward to her and kissed her hand again. She was dressed in black,
her hair was carefully arranged, and she smelt of fresh scent. She had
evidently dressed to go out or was expecting somebody. Coming into the
dining-room, she held out her hand to me with simple friendliness, and
smiled to me as graciously as she did to Ivan Ivanitch—that pleased
me; but as she talked she moved her fingers, often and abruptly leaned
back in her chair and talked rapidly, and this jerkiness in her words and
movements irritated me and reminded me of her native town—Odessa,
where the society, men and women alike, had wearied me by its bad taste.


“I want to do something for the famine-stricken peasants,” I began, and
after a brief pause I went on: “Money, of course, is a great thing, but to
confine oneself to subscribing money, and with that to be satisfied, would
be evading the worst of the trouble. Help must take the form of money, but
the most important thing is a proper and sound organization. Let us think
it over, my friends, and do something.”


Natalya Gavrilovna looked at me inquiringly and shrugged her shoulders as
though to say, “What do I know about it?”


“Yes, yes, famine...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch. “Certainly... yes.”


“It’s a serious position,” I said, “and assistance is needed as soon as
possible. I imagine the first point among the principles which we must
work out ought to be promptitude. We must act on the military principles
of judgment, promptitude, and energy.”


“Yes, promptitude...” repeated Ivan Ivanitch in a drowsy and listless
voice, as though he were dropping asleep. “Only one can’t do anything. The
crops have failed, and so what’s the use of all your judgment and
energy?... It’s the elements.... You can’t go against God and fate.”


“Yes, but that’s what man has a head for, to contend against the
elements.”


“Eh? Yes... that’s so, to be sure.... Yes.”


Ivan Ivanitch sneezed into his handkerchief, brightened up, and as though
he had just woken up, looked round at my wife and me.


“My crops have failed, too.” He laughed a thin little laugh and gave a sly
wink as though this were really funny. “No money, no corn, and a yard full
of labourers like Count Sheremetyev’s. I want to kick them out, but I
haven’t the heart to.”


Natalya Gavrilovna laughed, and began questioning him about his private
affairs. Her presence gave me a pleasure such as I had not felt for a long
time, and I was afraid to look at her for fear my eyes would betray my
secret feeling. Our relations were such that that feeling might seem
surprising and ridiculous.


She laughed and talked with Ivan Ivanitch without being in the least
disturbed that she was in my room and that I was not laughing.


“And so, my friends, what are we to do?” I asked after waiting for a
pause. “I suppose before we do anything else we had better immediately
open a subscription-list. We will write to our friends in the capitals and
in Odessa, Natalie, and ask them to subscribe. When we have got together a
little sum we will begin buying corn and fodder for the cattle; and you,
Ivan Ivanitch, will you be so kind as to undertake distributing the
relief? Entirely relying on your characteristic tact and efficiency, we
will only venture to express a desire that before you give any relief you
make acquaintance with the details of the case on the spot, and also,
which is very important, you should be careful that corn should be
distributed only to those who are in genuine need, and not to the drunken,
the idle, or the dishonest.”


“Yes, yes, yes...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch. “To be sure, to be sure.”


“Well, one won’t get much done with that slobbering wreck,” I thought, and
I felt irritated.


“I am sick of these famine-stricken peasants, bother them! It’s nothing
but grievances with them!” Ivan Ivanitch went on, sucking the rind of the
lemon. “The hungry have a grievance against those who have enough, and
those who have enough have a grievance against the hungry. Yes... hunger
stupefies and maddens a man and makes him savage; hunger is not a potato.
When a man is starving he uses bad language, and steals, and may do
worse.... One must realize that.”


Ivan Ivanitch choked over his tea, coughed, and shook all over with a
squeaky, smothered laughter.


“‘There was a battle at Pol... Poltava,’” he brought out, gesticulating
with both hands in protest against the laughter and coughing which
prevented him from speaking. “‘There was a battle at Poltava!’ When three
years after the Emancipation we had famine in two districts here, Fyodor
Fyodoritch came and invited me to go to him. ‘Come along, come along,’ he
persisted, and nothing else would satisfy him. ‘Very well, let us go,’ I
said. And, so we set off. It was in the evening; there was snow falling.
Towards night we were getting near his place, and suddenly from the wood
came ‘bang!’ and another time ‘bang!’ ‘Oh, damn it all!’... I jumped out
of the sledge, and I saw in the darkness a man running up to me, knee-deep
in the snow. I put my arm round his shoulder, like this, and knocked the
gun out of his hand. Then another one turned up; I fetched him a knock on
the back of his head so that he grunted and flopped with his nose in the
snow. I was a sturdy chap then, my fist was heavy; I disposed of two of
them, and when I turned round Fyodor was sitting astride of a third. We
did not let our three fine fellows go; we tied their hands behind their
backs so that they might not do us or themselves any harm, and took the
fools into the kitchen. We were angry with them and at the same time
ashamed to look at them; they were peasants we knew, and were good
fellows; we were sorry for them. They were quite stupid with terror. One
was crying and begging our pardon, the second looked like a wild beast and
kept swearing, the third knelt down and began to pray. I said to Fedya:
‘Don’t bear them a grudge; let them go, the rascals!’ He fed them, gave
them a bushel of flour each, and let them go: ‘Get along with you,’ he
said. So that’s what he did.... The Kingdom of Heaven be his and
everlasting peace! He understood and did not bear them a grudge; but there
were some who did, and how many people they ruined! Yes... Why, over the
affair at the Klotchkovs’ tavern eleven men were sent to the disciplinary
battalion. Yes.... And now, look, it’s the same thing. Anisyin, the
investigating magistrate, stayed the night with me last Thursday, and he
told me about some landowner.... Yes.... They took the wall of his barn to
pieces at night and carried off twenty sacks of rye. When the gentleman
heard that such a crime had been committed, he sent a telegram to the
Governor and another to the police captain, another to the investigating
magistrate!... Of course, every one is afraid of a man who is fond of
litigation. The authorities were in a flutter and there was a general
hubbub. Two villages were searched.”


“Excuse me, Ivan Ivanitch,” I said. “Twenty sacks of rye were stolen from
me, and it was I who telegraphed to the Governor. I telegraphed to
Petersburg, too. But it was by no means out of love for litigation, as you
are pleased to express it, and not because I bore them a grudge. I look at
every subject from the point of view of principle. From the point of view
of the law, theft is the same whether a man is hungry or not.”


“Yes, yes...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch in confusion. “Of course... To be
sure, yes.”


Natalya Gavrilovna blushed.


“There are people...” she said and stopped; she made an effort to seem
indifferent, but she could not keep it up, and looked into my eyes with
the hatred that I know so well. “There are people,” she said, “for whom
famine and human suffering exist simply that they may vent their hateful
and despicable temperaments upon them.”


I was confused and shrugged my shoulders.


“I meant to say generally,” she went on, “that there are people who are
quite indifferent and completely devoid of all feeling of sympathy, yet
who do not pass human suffering by, but insist on meddling for fear people
should be able to do without them. Nothing is sacred for their vanity.”


“There are people,” I said softly, “who have an angelic character, but who
express their glorious ideas in such a form that it is difficult to
distinguish the angel from an Odessa market-woman.”


I must confess it was not happily expressed.


My wife looked at me as though it cost her a great effort to hold her
tongue. Her sudden outburst, and then her inappropriate eloquence on the
subject of my desire to help the famine-stricken peasants, were, to say
the least, out of place; when I had invited her to come upstairs I had
expected quite a different attitude to me and my intentions. I cannot say
definitely what I had expected, but I had been agreeably agitated by the
expectation. Now I saw that to go on speaking about the famine would be
difficult and perhaps stupid.


“Yes...” Ivan Ivanitch muttered inappropriately. “Burov, the merchant,
must have four hundred thousand at least. I said to him: ‘Hand over one or
two thousand to the famine. You can’t take it with you when you die,
anyway.’ He was offended. But we all have to die, you know. Death is not a
potato.”


A silence followed again.


“So there’s nothing left for me but to reconcile myself to loneliness,” I
sighed. “One cannot fight single-handed. Well, I will try single-handed.
Let us hope that my campaign against the famine will be more successful
than my campaign against indifference.”


“I am expected downstairs,” said Natalya Gavrilovna.


She got up from the table and turned to Ivan Ivanitch.


“So you will look in upon me downstairs for a minute? I won’t say good-bye
to you.”


And she went away.


Ivan Ivanitch was now drinking his seventh glass of tea, choking, smacking
his lips, and sucking sometimes his moustache, sometimes the lemon. He was
muttering something drowsily and listlessly, and I did not listen but
waited for him to go. At last, with an expression that suggested that he
had only come to me to take a cup of tea, he got up and began to take
leave. As I saw him out I said:


“And so you have given me no advice.”


“Eh? I am a feeble, stupid old man,” he answered. “What use would my
advice be? You shouldn’t worry yourself.... I really don’t know why you
worry yourself. Don’t disturb yourself, my dear fellow! Upon my word,
there’s no need,” he whispered genuinely and affectionately, soothing me
as though I were a child. “Upon my word, there’s no need.”


“No need? Why, the peasants are pulling the thatch off their huts, and
they say there is typhus somewhere already.”


“Well, what of it? If there are good crops next year, they’ll thatch them
again, and if we die of typhus others will live after us. Anyway, we have
to die—if not now, later. Don’t worry yourself, my dear.”


“I can’t help worrying myself,” I said irritably.


We were standing in the dimly lighted vestibule. Ivan Ivanitch suddenly
took me by the elbow, and, preparing to say something evidently very
important, looked at me in silence for a couple of minutes.


“Pavel Andreitch!” he said softly, and suddenly in his puffy, set face and
dark eyes there was a gleam of the expression for which he had once been
famous and which was truly charming. “Pavel Andreitch, I speak to you as a
friend: try to be different! One is ill at ease with you, my dear fellow,
one really is!”


He looked intently into my face; the charming expression faded away, his
eyes grew dim again, and he sniffed and muttered feebly:


“Yes, yes.... Excuse an old man.... It’s all nonsense... yes.”


As he slowly descended the staircase, spreading out his hands to balance
himself and showing me his huge, bulky back and red neck, he gave me the
unpleasant impression of a sort of crab.


“You ought to go away, your Excellency,” he muttered. “To Petersburg or
abroad.... Why should you live here and waste your golden days? You are
young, wealthy, and healthy.... Yes.... Ah, if I were younger I would
whisk away like a hare, and snap my fingers at everything.”


III


My wife’s outburst reminded me of our married life together. In old days
after every such outburst we felt irresistibly drawn to each other; we
would meet and let off all the dynamite that had accumulated in our souls.
And now after Ivan Ivanitch had gone away I had a strong impulse to go to
my wife. I wanted to go downstairs and tell her that her behaviour at tea
had been an insult to me, that she was cruel, petty, and that her plebeian
mind had never risen to a comprehension of what I was saying and of
what I was doing. I walked about the rooms a long time thinking of
what I would say to her and trying to guess what she would say to me.


That evening, after Ivan Ivanitch went away, I felt in a peculiarly
irritating form the uneasiness which had worried me of late. I could not
sit down or sit still, but kept walking about in the rooms that were
lighted up and keeping near to the one in which Marya Gerasimovna was
sitting. I had a feeling very much like that which I had on the North Sea
during a storm when every one thought that our ship, which had no freight
nor ballast, would overturn. And that evening I understood that my
uneasiness was not disappointment, as I had supposed, but a different
feeling, though what exactly I could not say, and that irritated me more
than ever.


“I will go to her,” I decided. “I can think of a pretext. I shall say that
I want to see Ivan Ivanitch; that will be all.”


I went downstairs and walked without haste over the carpeted floor through
the vestibule and the hall. Ivan Ivanitch was sitting on the sofa in the
drawing-room; he was drinking tea again and muttering something. My wife
was standing opposite to him and holding on to the back of a chair. There
was a gentle, sweet, and docile expression on her face, such as one sees
on the faces of people listening to crazy saints or holy men when a
peculiar hidden significance is imagined in their vague words and
mutterings. There was something morbid, something of a nun’s exaltation,
in my wife’s expression and attitude; and her low-pitched, half-dark rooms
with their old-fashioned furniture, with her birds asleep in their cages,
and with a smell of geranium, reminded me of the rooms of some abbess or
pious old lady.


I went into the drawing-room. My wife showed neither surprise nor
confusion, and looked at me calmly and serenely, as though she had known I
should come.


“I beg your pardon,” I said softly. “I am so glad you have not gone yet,
Ivan Ivanitch. I forgot to ask you, do you know the Christian name of the
president of our Zemstvo?”


“Andrey Stanislavovitch. Yes....”


“Merci,” I said, took out my notebook, and wrote it down.


There followed a silence during which my wife and Ivan Ivanitch were
probably waiting for me to go; my wife did not believe that I wanted to
know the president’s name—I saw that from her eyes.


“Well, I must be going, my beauty,” muttered Ivan Ivanitch, after I had
walked once or twice across the drawing-room and sat down by the
fireplace.


“No,” said Natalya Gavrilovna quickly, touching his hand. “Stay another
quarter of an hour.... Please do!”


Evidently she did not wish to be left alone with me without a witness.


“Oh, well, I’ll wait a quarter of an hour, too,” I thought.


“Why, it’s snowing!” I said, getting up and looking out of window. “A good
fall of snow! Ivan Ivanitch”—I went on walking about the room—“I
do regret not being a sportsman. I can imagine what a pleasure it must be
coursing hares or hunting wolves in snow like this!”


My wife, standing still, watched my movements, looking out of the corner
of her eyes without turning her head. She looked as though she thought I
had a sharp knife or a revolver in my pocket.


“Ivan Ivanitch, do take me out hunting some day,” I went on softly. “I
shall be very, very grateful to you.”


At that moment a visitor came into the room. He was a tall, thick-set
gentleman whom I did not know, with a bald head, a big fair beard, and
little eyes. From his baggy, crumpled clothes and his manners I took him
to be a parish clerk or a teacher, but my wife introduced him to me as Dr.
Sobol.


“Very, very glad to make your acquaintance,” said the doctor in a loud
tenor voice, shaking hands with me warmly, with a naive smile. “Very
glad!”


He sat down at the table, took a glass of tea, and said in a loud voice:


“Do you happen to have a drop of rum or brandy? Have pity on me, Olya, and
look in the cupboard; I am frozen,” he said, addressing the maid.


I sat down by the fire again, looked on, listened, and from time to time
put in a word in the general conversation. My wife smiled graciously to
the visitors and kept a sharp lookout on me, as though I were a wild
beast. She was oppressed by my presence, and this aroused in me jealousy,
annoyance, and an obstinate desire to wound her. “Wife, these snug rooms,
the place by the fire,” I thought, “are mine, have been mine for years,
but some crazy Ivan Ivanitch or Sobol has for some reason more right to
them than I. Now I see my wife, not out of window, but close at hand, in
ordinary home surroundings that I feel the want of now I am growing older,
and, in spite of her hatred for me, I miss her as years ago in my
childhood I used to miss my mother and my nurse. And I feel that now, on
the verge of old age, my love for her is purer and loftier than it was in
the past; and that is why I want to go up to her, to stamp hard on her toe
with my heel, to hurt her and smile as I do it.”


“Monsieur Marten,” I said, addressing the doctor, “how many hospitals have
we in the district?”


“Sobol,” my wife corrected.


“Two,” answered Sobol.


“And how many deaths are there every year in each hospital?”


“Pavel Andreitch, I want to speak to you,” said my wife.


She apologized to the visitors and went to the next room. I got up and
followed her.


“You will go upstairs to your own rooms this minute,” she said.


“You are ill-bred,” I said to her.


“You will go upstairs to your own rooms this very minute,” she repeated
sharply, and she looked into my face with hatred.


She was standing so near that if I had stooped a little my beard would
have touched her face.


“What is the matter?” I asked. “What harm have I done all at once?”


Her chin quivered, she hastily wiped her eyes, and, with a cursory glance
at the looking-glass, whispered:


“The old story is beginning all over again. Of course you won’t go away.
Well, do as you like. I’ll go away myself, and you stay.”


We returned to the drawing-room, she with a resolute face, while I
shrugged my shoulders and tried to smile. There were some more visitors—an
elderly lady and a young man in spectacles. Without greeting the new
arrivals or taking leave of the others, I went off to my own rooms.


After what had happened at tea and then again downstairs, it became clear
to me that our “family happiness,” which we had begun to forget about in
the course of the last two years, was through some absurd and trivial
reason beginning all over again, and that neither I nor my wife could now
stop ourselves; and that next day or the day after, the outburst of hatred
would, as I knew by experience of past years, be followed by something
revolting which would upset the whole order of our lives. “So it seems
that during these two years we have grown no wiser, colder, or calmer,” I
thought as I began walking about the rooms. “So there will again be tears,
outcries, curses, packing up, going abroad, then the continual sickly fear
that she will disgrace me with some coxcomb out there, Italian or Russian,
refusing a passport, letters, utter loneliness, missing her, and in five
years old age, grey hairs.” I walked about, imagining what was really
impossible—her, grown handsomer, stouter, embracing a man I did not
know. By now convinced that that would certainly happen, “‘Why,” I asked
myself, “Why, in one of our long past quarrels, had not I given her a
divorce, or why had she not at that time left me altogether? I should not
have had this yearning for her now, this hatred, this anxiety; and I
should have lived out my life quietly, working and not worrying about
anything.”


A carriage with two lamps drove into the yard, then a big sledge with
three horses. My wife was evidently having a party.


Till midnight everything was quiet downstairs and I heard nothing, but at
midnight there was a sound of moving chairs and a clatter of crockery. So
there was supper. Then the chairs moved again, and through the floor I
heard a noise; they seemed to be shouting hurrah. Marya Gerasimovna was
already asleep and I was quite alone in the whole upper storey; the
portraits of my forefathers, cruel, insignificant people, looked at me
from the walls of the drawing-room, and the reflection of my lamp in the
window winked unpleasantly. And with a feeling of jealousy and envy for
what was going on downstairs, I listened and thought: “I am master here;
if I like, I can in a moment turn out all that fine crew.” But I knew that
all that was nonsense, that I could not turn out any one, and the word
“master” had no meaning. One may think oneself master, married, rich, a
kammer-junker, as much as one likes, and at the same time not know what it
means.


After supper some one downstairs began singing in a tenor voice.


“Why, nothing special has happened,” I tried to persuade myself. “Why am I
so upset? I won’t go downstairs tomorrow, that’s all; and that will be the
end of our quarrel.”


At a quarter past one I went to bed.


“Have the visitors downstairs gone?” I asked Alexey as he was undressing
me.


“Yes, sir, they’ve gone.”


“And why were they shouting hurrah?”


“Alexey Dmitritch Mahonov subscribed for the famine fund a thousand
bushels of flour and a thousand roubles. And the old lady—I don’t
know her name—promised to set up a soup kitchen on her estate to
feed a hundred and fifty people. Thank God... Natalya Gavrilovna has been
pleased to arrange that all the gentry should assemble every Friday.”


“To assemble here, downstairs?”


“Yes, sir. Before supper they read a list: since August up to today
Natalya Gavrilovna has collected eight thousand roubles, besides corn.
Thank God.... What I think is that if our mistress does take trouble for
the salvation of her soul, she will soon collect a lot. There are plenty
of rich people here.”


Dismissing Alexey, I put out the light and drew the bedclothes over my
head.


“After all, why am I so troubled?” I thought. “What force draws me to the
starving peasants like a butterfly to a flame? I don’t know them, I don’t
understand them; I have never seen them and I don’t like them. Why this
uneasiness?”


I suddenly crossed myself under the quilt.


“But what a woman she is!” I said to myself, thinking of my wife. “There’s
a regular committee held in the house without my knowing. Why this
secrecy? Why this conspiracy? What have I done to them? Ivan Ivanitch is
right—I must go away.”


Next morning I woke up firmly resolved to go away. The events of the
previous day—the conversation at tea, my wife, Sobol, the supper, my
apprehensions—worried me, and I felt glad to think of getting away
from the surroundings which reminded me of all that. While I was drinking
my coffee the bailiff gave me a long report on various matters. The most
agreeable item he saved for the last.


“The thieves who stole our rye have been found,” he announced with a
smile. “The magistrate arrested three peasants at Pestrovo yesterday.”


“Go away!” I shouted at him; and a propos of nothing, I picked up the
cake-basket and flung it on the floor.


IV


After lunch I rubbed my hands, and thought I must go to my wife and tell
her that I was going away. Why? Who cared? Nobody cares, I answered, but
why shouldn’t I tell her, especially as it would give her nothing but
pleasure? Besides, to go away after our yesterday’s quarrel without saying
a word would not be quite tactful: she might think that I was frightened
of her, and perhaps the thought that she has driven me out of my house may
weigh upon her. It would be just as well, too, to tell her that I
subscribe five thousand, and to give her some advice about the
organization, and to warn her that her inexperience in such a complicated
and responsible matter might lead to most lamentable results. In short, I
wanted to see my wife, and while I thought of various pretexts for going
to her, I had a firm conviction in my heart that I should do so.


It was still light when I went in to her, and the lamps had not yet been
lighted. She was sitting in her study, which led from the drawing-room to
her bedroom, and, bending low over the table, was writing something
quickly. Seeing me, she started, got up from the table, and remained
standing in an attitude such as to screen her papers from me.


“I beg your pardon, I have only come for a minute,” I said, and, I don’t
know why, I was overcome with embarrassment. “I have learnt by chance that
you are organizing relief for the famine, Natalie.”


“Yes, I am. But that’s my business,” she answered.


“Yes, it is your business,” I said softly. “I am glad of it, for it just
fits in with my intentions. I beg your permission to take part in it.”


“Forgive me, I cannot let you do it,” she said in response, and looked
away.


“Why not, Natalie?” I said quietly. “Why not? I, too, am well fed and I,
too, want to help the hungry.”


“I don’t know what it has to do with you,” she said with a contemptuous
smile, shrugging her shoulders. “Nobody asks you.”


“Nobody asks you, either, and yet you have got up a regular committee in
my house,” I said.


“I am asked, but you can have my word for it no one will ever ask you. Go
and help where you are not known.”


“For God’s sake, don’t talk to me in that tone.” I tried to be mild, and
besought myself most earnestly not to lose my temper. For the first few
minutes I felt glad to be with my wife. I felt an atmosphere of youth, of
home, of feminine softness, of the most refined elegance—exactly
what was lacking on my floor and in my life altogether. My wife was
wearing a pink flannel dressing-gown; it made her look much younger, and
gave a softness to her rapid and sometimes abrupt movements. Her beautiful
dark hair, the mere sight of which at one time stirred me to passion, had
from sitting so long with her head bent come loose from the comb and was
untidy, but, to my eyes, that only made it look more rich and luxuriant.
All this, though is banal to the point of vulgarity. Before me stood an
ordinary woman, perhaps neither beautiful nor elegant, but this was my
wife with whom I had once lived, and with whom I should have been living
to this day if it had not been for her unfortunate character; she was the
one human being on the terrestrial globe whom I loved. At this moment,
just before going away, when I knew that I should no longer see her even
through the window, she seemed to me fascinating even as she was, cold and
forbidding, answering me with a proud and contemptuous mockery. I was
proud of her, and confessed to myself that to go away from her was
terrible and impossible.


“Pavel Andreitch,” she said after a brief silence, “for two years we have
not interfered with each other but have lived quietly. Why do you suddenly
feel it necessary to go back to the past? Yesterday you came to insult and
humiliate me,” she went on, raising her voice, and her face flushed and
her eyes flamed with hatred; “but restrain yourself; do not do it, Pavel
Andreitch! Tomorrow I will send in a petition and they will give me a
passport, and I will go away; I will go! I will go! I’ll go into a
convent, into a widows’ home, into an almshouse....”


“Into a lunatic asylum!” I cried, not able to restrain myself.


“Well, even into a lunatic asylum! That would be better, that would be
better,” she cried, with flashing eyes. “When I was in Pestrovo today I
envied the sick and starving peasant women because they are not living
with a man like you. They are free and honest, while, thanks to you, I am
a parasite, I am perishing in idleness, I eat your bread, I spend your
money, and I repay you with my liberty and a fidelity which is of no use
to any one. Because you won’t give me a passport, I must respect your good
name, though it doesn’t exist.”


I had to keep silent. Clenching my teeth, I walked quickly into the
drawing-room, but turned back at once and said:


“I beg you earnestly that there should be no more assemblies, plots, and
meetings of conspirators in my house! I only admit to my house those with
whom I am acquainted, and let all your crew find another place to do it if
they want to take up philanthropy. I can’t allow people at midnight in my
house to be shouting hurrah at successfully exploiting an hysterical woman
like you!”


My wife, pale and wringing her hands, took a rapid stride across the room,
uttering a prolonged moan as though she had toothache. With a wave of my
hand, I went into the drawing-room. I was choking with rage, and at the
same time I was trembling with terror that I might not restrain myself,
and that I might say or do something which I might regret all my life. And
I clenched my hands tight, hoping to hold myself in.


After drinking some water and recovering my calm a little, I went back to
my wife. She was standing in the same attitude as before, as though
barring my approach to the table with the papers. Tears were slowly
trickling down her pale, cold face. I paused then and said to her bitterly
but without anger:


“How you misunderstand me! How unjust you are to me! I swear upon my
honour I came to you with the best of motives, with nothing but the desire
to do good!”


“Pavel Andreitch!” she said, clasping her hands on her bosom, and her face
took on the agonized, imploring expression with which frightened, weeping
children beg not to be punished, “I know perfectly well that you will
refuse me, but still I beg you. Force yourself to do one kind action in
your life. I entreat you, go away from here! That’s the only thing you can
do for the starving peasants. Go away, and I will forgive you everything,
everything!”


“There is no need for you to insult me, Natalie,” I sighed, feeling a
sudden rush of humility. “I had already made up my mind to go away, but I
won’t go until I have done something for the peasants. It’s my duty!”


“Ach!” she said softly with an impatient frown. “You can make an excellent
bridge or railway, but you can do nothing for the starving peasants. Do
understand!”


“Indeed? Yesterday you reproached me with indifference and with being
devoid of the feeling of compassion. How well you know me!” I laughed.
“You believe in God—well, God is my witness that I am worried day
and night....”


“I see that you are worried, but the famine and compassion have nothing to
do with it. You are worried because the starving peasants can get on
without you, and because the Zemstvo, and in fact every one who is helping
them, does not need your guidance.”


I was silent, trying to suppress my irritation. Then I said:


“I came to speak to you on business. Sit down. Please sit down.”


She did not sit down.


“I beg you to sit down,” I repeated, and I motioned her to a chair.


She sat down. I sat down, too, thought a little, and said:


“I beg you to consider earnestly what I am saying. Listen.... Moved by
love for your fellow-creatures, you have undertaken the organization of
famine relief. I have nothing against that, of course; I am completely in
sympathy with you, and am prepared to co-operate with you in every way,
whatever our relations may be. But, with all my respect for your mind and
your heart... and your heart,” I repeated, “I cannot allow such a
difficult, complex, and responsible matter as the organization of relief
to be left in your hands entirely. You are a woman, you are inexperienced,
you know nothing of life, you are too confiding and expansive. You have
surrounded yourself with assistants whom you know nothing about. I am not
exaggerating if I say that under these conditions your work will
inevitably lead to two deplorable consequences. To begin with, our
district will be left unrelieved; and, secondly, you will have to pay for
your mistakes and those of your assistants, not only with your purse, but
with your reputation. The money deficit and other losses I could, no
doubt, make good, but who could restore you your good name? When through
lack of proper supervision and oversight there is a rumour that you, and
consequently I, have made two hundred thousand over the famine fund, will
your assistants come to your aid?”


She said nothing.


“Not from vanity, as you say,” I went on, “but simply that the starving
peasants may not be left unrelieved and your reputation may not be
injured, I feel it my moral duty to take part in your work.”


“Speak more briefly,” said my wife.


“You will be so kind,” I went on, “as to show me what has been subscribed
so far and what you have spent. Then inform me daily of every fresh
subscription in money or kind, and of every fresh outlay. You will also
give me, Natalie, the list of your helpers. Perhaps they are quite decent
people; I don’t doubt it; but, still, it is absolutely necessary to make
inquiries.”


She was silent. I got up, and walked up and down the room.


“Let us set to work, then,” I said, and I sat down to her table.


“Are you in earnest?” she asked, looking at me in alarm and bewilderment.


“Natalie, do be reasonable!” I said appealingly, seeing from her face that
she meant to protest. “I beg you, trust my experience and my sense of
honour.”


“I don’t understand what you want.”


“Show me how much you have collected and how much you have spent.”


“I have no secrets. Any one may see. Look.”


On the table lay five or six school exercise books, several sheets of
notepaper covered with writing, a map of the district, and a number of
pieces of paper of different sizes. It was getting dusk. I lighted a
candle.


“Excuse me, I don’t see anything yet,” I said, turning over the leaves of
the exercise books. “Where is the account of the receipt of money
subscriptions?”


“That can be seen from the subscription lists.”


“Yes, but you must have an account,” I said, smiling at her naivete.
“Where are the letters accompanying the subscriptions in money or in kind?
Pardon, a little practical advice, Natalie: it’s absolutely
necessary to keep those letters. You ought to number each letter and make
a special note of it in a special record. You ought to do the same with
your own letters. But I will do all that myself.”


“Do so, do so...” she said.


I was very much pleased with myself. Attracted by this living interesting
work, by the little table, the naive exercise books and the charm of doing
this work in my wife’s society, I was afraid that my wife would suddenly
hinder me and upset everything by some sudden whim, and so I was in haste
and made an effort to attach no consequence to the fact that her lips were
quivering, and that she was looking about her with a helpless and
frightened air like a wild creature in a trap.


“I tell you what, Natalie,” I said without looking at her; “let me take
all these papers and exercise books upstairs to my study. There I will
look through them and tell you what I think about it tomorrow. Have you
any more papers?” I asked, arranging the exercise books and sheets of
papers in piles.


“Take them, take them all!” said my wife, helping me to arrange them, and
big tears ran down her cheeks. “Take it all! That’s all that was left me
in life.... Take the last.”


“Ach! Natalie, Natalie!” I sighed reproachfully.


She opened the drawer in the table and began flinging the papers out of it
on the table at random, poking me in the chest with her elbow and brushing
my face with her hair; as she did so, copper coins kept dropping upon my
knees and on the floor.


“Take everything!” she said in a husky voice.


When she had thrown out the papers she walked away from me, and putting
both hands to her head, she flung herself on the couch. I picked up the
money, put it back in the drawer, and locked it up that the servants might
not be led into dishonesty; then I gathered up all the papers and went off
with them. As I passed my wife I stopped and, looking at her back and
shaking shoulders, I said:


“What a baby you are, Natalie! Fie, fie! Listen, Natalie: when you realize
how serious and responsible a business it is you will be the first to
thank me. I assure you you will.”


In my own room I set to work without haste. The exercise books were not
bound, the pages were not numbered. The entries were put in all sorts of
handwritings; evidently any one who liked had a hand in managing the
books. In the record of the subscriptions in kind there was no note of
their money value. But, excuse me, I thought, the rye which is now worth
one rouble fifteen kopecks may be worth two roubles fifteen kopecks in two
months’ time! Was that the way to do things? Then, “Given to A. M. Sobol
32 roubles.” When was it given? For what purpose was it given? Where was
the receipt? There was nothing to show, and no making anything of it. In
case of legal proceedings, these papers would only obscure the case.


“How naive she is!” I thought with surprise. “What a child!”


I felt both vexed and amused.


V


My wife had already collected eight thousand; with my five it would be
thirteen thousand. For a start that was very good. The business which had
so worried and interested me was at last in my hands; I was doing what the
others would not and could not do; I was doing my duty, organizing the
relief fund in a practical and business-like way.


Everything seemed to be going in accordance with my desires and
intentions; but why did my feeling of uneasiness persist? I spent four
hours over my wife’s papers, making out their meaning and correcting her
mistakes, but instead of feeling soothed, I felt as though some one were
standing behind me and rubbing my back with a rough hand. What was it I
wanted? The organization of the relief fund had come into trustworthy
hands, the hungry would be fed—what more was wanted?


The four hours of this light work for some reason exhausted me, so that I
could not sit bending over the table nor write. From below I heard from
time to time a smothered moan; it was my wife sobbing. Alexey, invariably
meek, sleepy, and sanctimonious, kept coming up to the table to see to the
candles, and looked at me somewhat strangely.


“Yes, I must go away,” I decided at last, feeling utterly exhausted. “As
far as possible from these agreeable impressions! I will set off
tomorrow.”


I gathered together the papers and exercise books, and went down to my
wife. As, feeling quite worn out and shattered, I held the papers and the
exercise books to my breast with both hands, and passing through my
bedroom saw my trunks, the sound of weeping reached me through the floor.


“Are you a kammer-junker?” a voice whispered in my ear. “That’s a very
pleasant thing. But yet you are a reptile.”


“It’s all nonsense, nonsense, nonsense,” I muttered as I went downstairs.
“Nonsense... and it’s nonsense, too, that I am actuated by vanity or a
love of display.... What rubbish! Am I going to get a decoration for
working for the peasants or be made the director of a department?
Nonsense, nonsense! And who is there to show off to here in the country?”


I was tired, frightfully tired, and something kept whispering in my ear:
“Very pleasant. But, still, you are a reptile.” For some reason I
remembered a line out of an old poem I knew as a child: “How pleasant it
is to be good!”


My wife was lying on the couch in the same attitude, on her face and with
her hands clutching her head. She was crying. A maid was standing beside
her with a perplexed and frightened face. I sent the maid away, laid the
papers on the table, thought a moment and said:


“Here are all your papers, Natalie. It’s all in order, it’s all capital,
and I am very much pleased. I am going away tomorrow.”


She went on crying. I went into the drawing-room and sat there in the
dark. My wife’s sobs, her sighs, accused me of something, and to justify
myself I remembered the whole of our quarrel, starting from my unhappy
idea of inviting my wife to our consultation and ending with the exercise
books and these tears. It was an ordinary attack of our conjugal hatred,
senseless and unseemly, such as had been frequent during our married life,
but what had the starving peasants to do with it? How could it have
happened that they had become a bone of contention between us? It was just
as though pursuing one another we had accidentally run up to the altar and
had carried on a quarrel there.


“Natalie,” I said softly from the drawing-room, “hush, hush!”


To cut short her weeping and make an end of this agonizing state of
affairs, I ought to have gone up to my wife and comforted her, caressed
her, or apologized; but how could I do it so that she would believe me?
How could I persuade the wild duck, living in captivity and hating me,
that it was dear to me, and that I felt for its sufferings? I had never
known my wife, so I had never known how to talk to her or what to talk
about. Her appearance I knew very well and appreciated it as it deserved,
but her spiritual, moral world, her mind, her outlook on life, her
frequent changes of mood, her eyes full of hatred, her disdain, the scope
and variety of her reading which sometimes struck me, or, for instance,
the nun-like expression I had seen on her face the day before—all
that was unknown and incomprehensible to me. When in my collisions with
her I tried to define what sort of a person she was, my psychology went no
farther than deciding that she was giddy, impractical, ill-tempered,
guided by feminine logic; and it seemed to me that that was quite
sufficient. But now that she was crying I had a passionate desire to know
more.


The weeping ceased. I went up to my wife. She sat up on the couch, and,
with her head propped in both hands, looked fixedly and dreamily at the
fire.


“I am going away tomorrow morning,” I said.


She said nothing. I walked across the room, sighed, and said:


“Natalie, when you begged me to go away, you said: ‘I will forgive you
everything, everything’.... So you think I have wronged you. I beg you
calmly and in brief terms to formulate the wrong I’ve done you.”


“I am worn out. Afterwards, some time...” said my wife.


“How am I to blame?” I went on. “What have I done? Tell me: you are young
and beautiful, you want to live, and I am nearly twice your age and hated
by you, but is that my fault? I didn’t marry you by force. But if you want
to live in freedom, go; I’ll give you your liberty. You can go and love
whom you please.... I will give you a divorce.”


“That’s not what I want,” she said. “You know I used to love you and
always thought of myself as older than you. That’s all nonsense.... You
are not to blame for being older or for my being younger, or that I might
be able to love some one else if I were free; but because you are a
difficult person, an egoist, and hate every one.”


“Perhaps so. I don’t know,” I said.


“Please go away. You want to go on at me till the morning, but I warn you
I am quite worn out and cannot answer you. You promised me to go to town.
I am very grateful; I ask nothing more.”


My wife wanted me to go away, but it was not easy for me to do that. I was
dispirited and I dreaded the big, cheerless, chill rooms that I was so
weary of. Sometimes when I had an ache or a pain as a child, I used to
huddle up to my mother or my nurse, and when I hid my face in the warm
folds of their dress, it seemed to me as though I were hiding from the
pain. And in the same way it seemed to me now that I could only hide from
my uneasiness in this little room beside my wife. I sat down and screened
away the light from my eyes with my hand.... There was a stillness.


“How are you to blame?” my wife said after a long silence, looking at me
with red eyes that gleamed with tears. “You are very well educated and
very well bred, very honest, just, and high-principled, but in you the
effect of all that is that wherever you go you bring suffocation,
oppression, something insulting and humiliating to the utmost degree. You
have a straightforward way of looking at things, and so you hate the whole
world. You hate those who have faith, because faith is an expression of
ignorance and lack of culture, and at the same time you hate those who
have no faith for having no faith and no ideals; you hate old people for
being conservative and behind the times, and young people for
free-thinking. The interests of the peasantry and of Russia are dear to
you, and so you hate the peasants because you suspect every one of them of
being a thief and a robber. You hate every one. You are just, and always
take your stand on your legal rights, and so you are always at law with
the peasants and your neighbours. You have had twenty bushels of rye
stolen, and your love of order has made you complain of the peasants to
the Governor and all the local authorities, and to send a complaint of the
local authorities to Petersburg. Legal justice!” said my wife, and she
laughed. “On the ground of your legal rights and in the interests of
morality, you refuse to give me a passport. Law and morality is such that
a self-respecting healthy young woman has to spend her life in idleness,
in depression, and in continual apprehension, and to receive in return
board and lodging from a man she does not love. You have a thorough
knowledge of the law, you are very honest and just, you respect marriage
and family life, and the effect of all that is that all your life you have
not done one kind action, that every one hates you, that you are on bad
terms with every one, and the seven years that you have been married
you’ve only lived seven months with your wife. You’ve had no wife and I’ve
had no husband. To live with a man like you is impossible; there is no way
of doing it. In the early years I was frightened with you, and now I am
ashamed.... That’s how my best years have been wasted. When I fought with
you I ruined my temper, grew shrewish, coarse, timid, mistrustful.... Oh,
but what’s the use of talking! As though you wanted to understand! Go
upstairs, and God be with you!”


My wife lay down on the couch and sank into thought.


“And how splendid, how enviable life might have been!” she said softly,
looking reflectively into the fire. “What a life it might have been!
There’s no bringing it back now.”


Any one who has lived in the country in winter and knows those long
dreary, still evenings when even the dogs are too bored to bark and even
the clocks seem weary of ticking, and any one who on such evenings has
been troubled by awakening conscience and has moved restlessly about,
trying now to smother his conscience, now to interpret it, will understand
the distraction and the pleasure my wife’s voice gave me as it sounded in
the snug little room, telling me I was a bad man. I did not understand
what was wanted of me by my conscience, and my wife, translating it in her
feminine way, made clear to me in the meaning of my agitation. As often
before in the moments of intense uneasiness, I guessed that the whole
secret lay, not in the starving peasants, but in my not being the sort of
a man I ought to be.


My wife got up with an effort and came up to me.


“Pavel Andreitch,” she said, smiling mournfully, “forgive me, I don’t
believe you: you are not going away, but I will ask you one more favour.
Call this”—she pointed to her papers—“self-deception, feminine
logic, a mistake, as you like; but do not hinder me. It’s all that is left
me in life.” She turned away and paused. “Before this I had nothing. I
have wasted my youth in fighting with you. Now I have caught at this and
am living; I am happy.... It seems to me that I have found in this a means
of justifying my existence.”


“Natalie, you are a good woman, a woman of ideas,” I said, looking at my
wife enthusiastically, “and everything you say and do is intelligent and
fine.”


I walked about the room to conceal my emotion.


“Natalie,” I went on a minute later, “before I go away, I beg of you as a
special favour, help me to do something for the starving peasants!”


“What can I do?” said my wife, shrugging her shoulders. “Here’s the
subscription list.”


She rummaged among the papers and found the subscription list.


“Subscribe some money,” she said, and from her tone I could see that she
did not attach great importance to her subscription list; “that is the
only way in which you can take part in the work.”


I took the list and wrote: “Anonymous, 5,000.”


In this “anonymous” there was something wrong, false, conceited, but I
only realized that when I noticed that my wife flushed very red and
hurriedly thrust the list into the heap of papers. We both felt ashamed; I
felt that I must at all costs efface this clumsiness at once, or else I
should feel ashamed afterwards, in the train and at Petersburg. But how
efface it? What was I to say?


“I fully approve of what you are doing, Natalie,” I said genuinely, “and I
wish you every success. But allow me at parting to give you one piece of
advice, Natalie; be on your guard with Sobol, and with your assistants
generally, and don’t trust them blindly. I don’t say they are not honest,
but they are not gentlefolks; they are people with no ideas, no ideals, no
faith, with no aim in life, no definite principles, and the whole object
of their life is comprised in the rouble. Rouble, rouble, rouble!” I
sighed. “They are fond of getting money easily, for nothing, and in that
respect the better educated they are the more they are to be dreaded.”


My wife went to the couch and lay down.


“Ideas,” she brought out, listlessly and reluctantly, “ideas, ideals,
objects of life, principles....you always used to use those words when you
wanted to insult or humiliate some one, or say something unpleasant. Yes,
that’s your way: if with your views and such an attitude to people you are
allowed to take part in anything, you would destroy it from the first day.
It’s time you understand that.”


She sighed and paused.


“It’s coarseness of character, Pavel Andreitch,” she said. “You are
well-bred and educated, but what a... Scythian you are in reality! That’s
because you lead a cramped life full of hatred, see no one, and read
nothing but your engineering books. And, you know, there are good people,
good books! Yes... but I am exhausted and it wearies me to talk. I ought
to be in bed.”


“So I am going away, Natalie,” I said.


“Yes... yes.... Merci....”


I stood still for a little while, then went upstairs. An hour later—it
was half-past one—I went downstairs again with a candle in my hand
to speak to my wife. I didn’t know what I was going to say to her, but I
felt that I must say some thing very important and necessary. She was not
in her study, the door leading to her bedroom was closed.


“Natalie, are you asleep?” I asked softly.


There was no answer.


I stood near the door, sighed, and went into the drawing-room. There I sat
down on the sofa, put out the candle, and remained sitting in the dark
till the dawn.


VI


I went to the station at ten o’clock in the morning. There was no frost,
but snow was falling in big wet flakes and an unpleasant damp wind was
blowing.


We passed a pond and then a birch copse, and then began going uphill along
the road which I could see from my window. I turned round to take a last
look at my house, but I could see nothing for the snow. Soon afterwards
dark huts came into sight ahead of us as in a fog. It was Pestrovo.


“If I ever go out of my mind, Pestrovo will be the cause of it,” I
thought. “It persecutes me.”


We came out into the village street. All the roofs were intact, not one of
them had been pulled to pieces; so my bailiff had told a lie. A boy was
pulling along a little girl and a baby in a sledge. Another boy of three,
with his head wrapped up like a peasant woman’s and with huge mufflers on
his hands, was trying to catch the flying snowflakes on his tongue, and
laughing. Then a wagon loaded with fagots came toward us and a peasant
walking beside it, and there was no telling whether his beard was white or
whether it was covered with snow. He recognized my coachman, smiled at him
and said something, and mechanically took off his hat to me. The dogs ran
out of the yards and looked inquisitively at my horses. Everything was
quiet, ordinary, as usual. The emigrants had returned, there was no bread;
in the huts “some were laughing, some were delirious”; but it all looked
so ordinary that one could not believe it really was so. There were no
distracted faces, no voices whining for help, no weeping, nor abuse, but
all around was stillness, order, life, children, sledges, dogs with
dishevelled tails. Neither the children nor the peasant we met were
troubled; why was I so troubled?


Looking at the smiling peasant, at the boy with the huge mufflers, at the
huts, remembering my wife, I realized there was no calamity that could
daunt this people; I felt as though there were already a breath of victory
in the air. I felt proud and felt ready to cry out that I was with them
too; but the horses were carrying us away from the village into the open
country, the snow was whirling, the wind was howling, and I was left alone
with my thoughts. Of the million people working for the peasantry, life
itself had cast me out as a useless, incompetent, bad man. I was a
hindrance, a part of the people’s calamity; I was vanquished, cast out,
and I was hurrying to the station to go away and hide myself in Petersburg
in a hotel in Bolshaya Morskaya.


An hour later we reached the station. The coachman and a porter with a
disc on his breast carried my trunks into the ladies’ room. My coachman
Nikanor, wearing high felt boots and the skirt of his coat tucked up
through his belt, all wet with the snow and glad I was going away, gave me
a friendly smile and said:


“A fortunate journey, your Excellency. God give you luck.”


Every one, by the way, calls me “your Excellency,” though I am only a
collegiate councillor and a kammer-junker. The porter told me the train
had not yet left the next station; I had to wait. I went outside, and with
my head heavy from my sleepless night, and so exhausted I could hardly
move my legs, I walked aimlessly towards the pump. There was not a soul
anywhere near.


“Why am I going?” I kept asking myself. “What is there awaiting me there?
The acquaintances from whom I have come away, loneliness, restaurant
dinners, noise, the electric light, which makes my eyes ache. Where am I
going, and what am I going for? What am I going for?”


And it seemed somehow strange to go away without speaking to my wife. I
felt that I was leaving her in uncertainty. Going away, I ought to have
told that she was right, that I really was a bad man.


When I turned away from the pump, I saw in the doorway the station-master,
of whom I had twice made complaints to his superiors, turning up the
collar of his coat, shrinking from the wind and the snow. He came up to
me, and putting two fingers to the peak of his cap, told me with an
expression of helpless confusion, strained respectfulness, and hatred on
his face, that the train was twenty minutes late, and asked me would I not
like to wait in the warm?


“Thank you,” I answered, “but I am probably not going. Send word to my
coachman to wait; I have not made up my mind.”


I walked to and fro on the platform and thought, should I go away or not?
When the train came in I decided not to go. At home I had to expect my
wife’s amazement and perhaps her mockery, the dismal upper storey and my
uneasiness; but, still, at my age that was easier and as it were more
homelike than travelling for two days and nights with strangers to
Petersburg, where I should be conscious every minute that my life was of
no use to any one or to anything, and that it was approaching its end. No,
better at home whatever awaited me there.... I went out of the station. It
was awkward by daylight to return home, where every one was so glad at my
going. I might spend the rest of the day till evening at some neighbour’s,
but with whom? With some of them I was on strained relations, others I did
not know at all. I considered and thought of Ivan Ivanitch.


“We are going to Bragino!” I said to the coachman, getting into the
sledge.


“It’s a long way,” sighed Nikanor; “it will be twenty miles, or maybe
twenty-five.”


“Oh, please, my dear fellow,” I said in a tone as though Nikanor had the
right to refuse. “Please let us go!”


Nikanor shook his head doubtfully and said slowly that we really ought to
have put in the shafts, not Circassian, but Peasant or Siskin; and
uncertainly, as though expecting I should change my mind, took the reins
in his gloves, stood up, thought a moment, and then raised his whip.


“A whole series of inconsistent actions...” I thought, screening my face
from the snow. “I must have gone out of my mind. Well, I don’t care....”


In one place, on a very high and steep slope, Nikanor carefully held the
horses in to the middle of the descent, but in the middle the horses
suddenly bolted and dashed downhill at a fearful rate; he raised his
elbows and shouted in a wild, frantic voice such as I had never heard from
him before:


“Hey! Let’s give the general a drive! If you come to grief he’ll buy new
ones, my darlings! Hey! look out! We’ll run you down!”


Only now, when the extraordinary pace we were going at took my breath
away, I noticed that he was very drunk. He must have been drinking at the
station. At the bottom of the descent there was the crash of ice; a piece
of dirty frozen snow thrown up from the road hit me a painful blow in the
face.


The runaway horses ran up the hill as rapidly as they had downhill, and
before I had time to shout to Nikanor my sledge was flying along on the
level in an old pine forest, and the tall pines were stretching out their
shaggy white paws to me from all directions.


“I have gone out of my mind, and the coachman’s drunk,” I thought. “Good!”


I found Ivan Ivanitch at home. He laughed till he coughed, laid his head
on my breast, and said what he always did say on meeting me:


“You grow younger and younger. I don’t know what dye you use for your hair
and your beard; you might give me some of it.”


“I’ve come to return your call, Ivan Ivanitch,” I said untruthfully.
“Don’t be hard on me; I’m a townsman, conventional; I do keep count of
calls.”


“I am delighted, my dear fellow. I am an old man; I like respect.... Yes.”


From his voice and his blissfully smiling face, I could see that he was
greatly flattered by my visit. Two peasant women helped me off with my
coat in the entry, and a peasant in a red shirt hung it on a hook, and
when Ivan Ivanitch and I went into his little study, two barefooted little
girls were sitting on the floor looking at a picture-book; when they saw
us they jumped up and ran away, and a tall, thin old woman in spectacles
came in at once, bowed gravely to me, and picking up a pillow from the
sofa and a picture-book from the floor, went away. From the adjoining
rooms we heard incessant whispering and the patter of bare feet.


“I am expecting the doctor to dinner,” said Ivan Ivanitch. “He promised to
come from the relief centre. Yes. He dines with me every Wednesday, God
bless him.” He craned towards me and kissed me on the neck. “You have
come, my dear fellow, so you are not vexed,” he whispered, sniffing.
“Don’t be vexed, my dear creature. Yes. Perhaps it is annoying, but don’t
be cross. My only prayer to God before I die is to live in peace and
harmony with all in the true way. Yes.”


“Forgive me, Ivan Ivanitch, I will put my feet on a chair,” I said,
feeling that I was so exhausted I could not be myself; I sat further back
on the sofa and put up my feet on an arm-chair. My face was burning from
the snow and the wind, and I felt as though my whole body were basking in
the warmth and growing weaker from it.


“It’s very nice here,” I went on—“warm, soft, snug... and
goose-feather pens,” I laughed, looking at the writing-table; “sand
instead of blotting-paper.”


“Eh? Yes... yes.... The writing-table and the mahogany cupboard here were
made for my father by a self-taught cabinet-maker—Glyeb Butyga, a
serf of General Zhukov’s. Yes... a great artist in his own way.”


Listlessly and in the tone of a man dropping asleep, he began telling me
about cabinet-maker Butyga. I listened. Then Ivan Ivanitch went into the
next room to show me a polisander wood chest of drawers remarkable for its
beauty and cheapness. He tapped the chest with his fingers, then called my
attention to a stove of patterned tiles, such as one never sees now. He
tapped the stove, too, with his fingers. There was an atmosphere of
good-natured simplicity and well-fed abundance about the chest of drawers,
the tiled stove, the low chairs, the pictures embroidered in wool and silk
on canvas in solid, ugly frames. When one remembers that all those objects
were standing in the same places and precisely in the same order when I
was a little child, and used to come here to name-day parties with my
mother, it is simply unbelievable that they could ever cease to exist.


I thought what a fearful difference between Butyga and me! Butyga who made
things, above all, solidly and substantially, and seeing in that his chief
object, gave to length of life peculiar significance, had no thought of
death, and probably hardly believed in its possibility; I, when I built my
bridges of iron and stone which would last a thousand years, could not
keep from me the thought, “It’s not for long....it’s no use.” If in time
Butyga’s cupboard and my bridge should come under the notice of some
sensible historian of art, he would say: “These were two men remarkable in
their own way: Butyga loved his fellow-creatures and would not admit the
thought that they might die and be annihilated, and so when he made his
furniture he had the immortal man in his mind. The engineer Asorin did not
love life or his fellow-creatures; even in the happy moments of creation,
thoughts of death, of finiteness and dissolution, were not alien to him,
and we see how insignificant and finite, how timid and poor, are these
lines of his....”


“I only heat these rooms,” muttered Ivan Ivanitch, showing me his rooms.
“Ever since my wife died and my son was killed in the war, I have kept the
best rooms shut up. Yes... see...”


He opened a door, and I saw a big room with four columns, an old piano,
and a heap of peas on the floor; it smelt cold and damp.


“The garden seats are in the next room...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch.
“There’s no one to dance the mazurka now.... I’ve shut them up.”


We heard a noise. It was Dr. Sobol arriving. While he was rubbing his cold
hands and stroking his wet beard, I had time to notice in the first place
that he had a very dull life, and so was pleased to see Ivan Ivanitch and
me; and, secondly, that he was a naive and simple-hearted man. He looked
at me as though I were very glad to see him and very much interested in
him.


“I have not slept for two nights,” he said, looking at me naively and
stroking his beard. “One night with a confinement, and the next I stayed
at a peasant’s with the bugs biting me all night. I am as sleepy as Satan,
do you know.”


With an expression on his face as though it could not afford me anything
but pleasure, he took me by the arm and led me to the dining-room. His
naive eyes, his crumpled coat, his cheap tie and the smell of iodoform
made an unpleasant impression upon me; I felt as though I were in vulgar
company. When we sat down to table he filled my glass with vodka, and,
smiling helplessly, I drank it; he put a piece of ham on my plate and I
ate it submissively.


“Repetitia est mater studiorum,” said Sobol, hastening to drink off
another wineglassful. “Would you believe it, the joy of seeing good people
has driven away my sleepiness? I have turned into a peasant, a savage in
the wilds; I’ve grown coarse, but I am still an educated man, and I tell
you in good earnest, it’s tedious without company.”


They served first for a cold course white sucking-pig with horse-radish
cream, then a rich and very hot cabbage soup with pork on it, with boiled
buckwheat, from which rose a column of steam. The doctor went on talking,
and I was soon convinced that he was a weak, unfortunate man, disorderly
in external life. Three glasses of vodka made him drunk; he grew
unnaturally lively, ate a great deal, kept clearing his throat and
smacking his lips, and already addressed me in Italian, “Eccellenza.”
Looking naively at me as though he were convinced that I was very glad to
see and hear him, he informed me that he had long been separated from his
wife and gave her three-quarters of his salary; that she lived in the town
with his children, a boy and a girl, whom he adored; that he loved another
woman, a widow, well educated, with an estate in the country, but was
rarely able to see her, as he was busy with his work from morning till
night and had not a free moment.


“The whole day long, first at the hospital, then on my rounds,” he told
us; “and I assure you, Eccellenza, I have not time to read a book, let
alone going to see the woman I love. I’ve read nothing for ten years! For
ten years, Eccellenza. As for the financial side of the question, ask Ivan
Ivanitch: I have often no money to buy tobacco.”


“On the other hand, you have the moral satisfaction of your work,” I said.


“What?” he asked, and he winked. “No,” he said, “better let us drink.”


I listened to the doctor, and, after my invariable habit, tried to take
his measure by my usual classification—materialist, idealist, filthy
lucre, gregarious instincts, and so on; but no classification fitted him
even approximately; and strange to say, while I simply listened and looked
at him, he seemed perfectly clear to me as a person, but as soon as I
began trying to classify him he became an exceptionally complex,
intricate, and incomprehensible character in spite of all his candour and
simplicity. “Is that man,” I asked myself, “capable of wasting other
people’s money, abusing their confidence, being disposed to sponge on
them?” And now this question, which had once seemed to me grave and
important, struck me as crude, petty, and coarse.


Pie was served; then, I remember, with long intervals between, during
which we drank home-made liquors, they gave us a stew of pigeons, some
dish of giblets, roast sucking-pig, partridges, cauliflower, curd
dumplings, curd cheese and milk, jelly, and finally pancakes and jam. At
first I ate with great relish, especially the cabbage soup and the
buckwheat, but afterwards I munched and swallowed mechanically, smiling
helplessly and unconscious of the taste of anything. My face was burning
from the hot cabbage soup and the heat of the room. Ivan Ivanitch and
Sobol, too, were crimson.


“To the health of your wife,” said Sobol. “She likes me. Tell her her
doctor sends her his respects.”


“She’s fortunate, upon my word,” sighed Ivan Ivanitch. “Though she takes
no trouble, does not fuss or worry herself, she has become the most
important person in the whole district. Almost the whole business is in
her hands, and they all gather round her, the doctor, the District
Captains, and the ladies. With people of the right sort that happens of
itself. Yes.... The apple-tree need take no thought for the apple to grow
on it; it will grow of itself.”


“It’s only people who don’t care who take no thought,” said I.


“Eh? Yes...” muttered Ivan Ivanitch, not catching what I said, “that’s
true.... One must not worry oneself. Just so, just so.... Only do your
duty towards God and your neighbour, and then never mind what happens.”


“Eccellenza,” said Sobol solemnly, “just look at nature about us: if you
poke your nose or your ear out of your fur collar it will be frost-bitten;
stay in the fields for one hour, you’ll be buried in the snow; while the
village is just the same as in the days of Rurik, the same Petchenyegs and
Polovtsi. It’s nothing but being burnt down, starving, and struggling
against nature in every way. What was I saying? Yes! If one thinks about
it, you know, looks into it and analyses all this hotchpotch, if you will
allow me to call it so, it’s not life but more like a fire in a theatre!
Any one who falls down or screams with terror, or rushes about, is the
worst enemy of good order; one must stand up and look sharp, and not stir
a hair! There’s no time for whimpering and busying oneself with trifles.
When you have to deal with elemental forces you must put out force against
them, be firm and as unyielding as a stone. Isn’t that right,
grandfather?” He turned to Ivan Ivanitch and laughed. “I am no better than
a woman myself; I am a limp rag, a flabby creature, so I hate flabbiness.
I can’t endure petty feelings! One mopes, another is frightened, a third
will come straight in here and say: ‘Fie on you! Here you’ve guzzled a
dozen courses and you talk about the starving!’ That’s petty and stupid! A
fourth will reproach you, Eccellenza, for being rich. Excuse me,
Eccellenza,” he went on in a loud voice, laying his hand on his heart,
“but your having set our magistrate the task of hunting day and night for
your thieves—excuse me, that’s also petty on your part. I am a
little drunk, so that’s why I say this now, but you know, it is petty!”


“Who’s asking him to worry himself? I don’t understand!” I said, getting
up.


I suddenly felt unbearably ashamed and mortified, and I walked round the
table.


“Who asks him to worry himself? I didn’t ask him to.... Damn him!”


“They have arrested three men and let them go again. They turned out not
to be the right ones, and now they are looking for a fresh lot,” said
Sobol, laughing. “It’s too bad!”


“I did not ask him to worry himself,” said I, almost crying with
excitement. “What’s it all for? What’s it all for? Well, supposing I was
wrong, supposing I have done wrong, why do they try to put me more in the
wrong?”


“Come, come, come, come!” said Sobol, trying to soothe me. “Come! I have
had a drop, that is why I said it. My tongue is my enemy. Come,” he
sighed, “we have eaten and drunk wine, and now for a nap.”


He got up from the table, kissed Ivan Ivanitch on the head, and staggering
from repletion, went out of the dining-room. Ivan Ivanitch and I smoked in
silence.


“I don’t sleep after dinner, my dear,” said Ivan Ivanitch, “but you have a
rest in the lounge-room.”


I agreed. In the half-dark and warmly heated room they called the
lounge-room, there stood against the walls long, wide sofas, solid and
heavy, the work of Butyga the cabinet maker; on them lay high, soft, white
beds, probably made by the old woman in spectacles. On one of them Sobol,
without his coat and boots, already lay asleep with his face to the back
of the sofa; another bed was awaiting me. I took off my coat and boots,
and, overcome by fatigue, by the spirit of Butyga which hovered over the
quiet lounge-room, and by the light, caressing snore of Sobol, I lay down
submissively.


And at once I began dreaming of my wife, of her room, of the
station-master with his face full of hatred, the heaps of snow, a fire in
the theatre. I dreamed of the peasants who had stolen twenty sacks of rye
out of my barn.


“Anyway, it’s a good thing the magistrate let them go,” I said.


I woke up at the sound of my own voice, looked for a moment in perplexity
at Sobol’s broad back, at the buckles of his waistcoat, at his thick
heels, then lay down again and fell asleep.


When I woke up the second time it was quite dark. Sobol was asleep. There
was peace in my heart, and I longed to make haste home. I dressed and went
out of the lounge-room. Ivan Ivanitch was sitting in a big arm-chair in
his study, absolutely motionless, staring at a fixed point, and it was
evident that he had been in the same state of petrifaction all the while I
had been asleep.


“Good!” I said, yawning. “I feel as though I had woken up after breaking
the fast at Easter. I shall often come and see you now. Tell me, did my
wife ever dine here?”


“So-ome-ti-mes... sometimes,”’ muttered Ivan Ivanitch, making an effort to
stir. “She dined here last Saturday. Yes.... She likes me.”


After a silence I said:


“Do you remember, Ivan Ivanitch, you told me I had a disagreeable
character and that it was difficult to get on with me? But what am I to do
to make my character different?”


“I don’t know, my dear boy.... I’m a feeble old man, I can’t advise
you.... Yes.... But I said that to you at the time because I am fond of
you and fond of your wife, and I was fond of your father.... Yes. I shall
soon die, and what need have I to conceal things from you or to tell you
lies? So I tell you: I am very fond of you, but I don’t respect you. No, I
don’t respect you.”


He turned towards me and said in a breathless whisper:


“It’s impossible to respect you, my dear fellow. You look like a real man.
You have the figure and deportment of the French President Carnot—I
saw a portrait of him the other day in an illustrated paper... yes.... You
use lofty language, and you are clever, and you are high up in the service
beyond all reach, but haven’t real soul, my dear boy... there’s no
strength in it.”


“A Scythian, in fact,” I laughed. “But what about my wife? Tell me
something about my wife; you know her better.”


I wanted to talk about my wife, but Sobol came in and prevented me.


“I’ve had a sleep and a wash,” he said, looking at me naively. “I’ll have
a cup of tea with some rum in it and go home.”


VII


It was by now past seven. Besides Ivan Ivanitch, women servants, the old
dame in spectacles, the little girls and the peasant, all accompanied us
from the hall out on to the steps, wishing us good-bye and all sorts of
blessings, while near the horses in the darkness there were standing and
moving about men with lanterns, telling our coachmen how and which way to
drive, and wishing us a lucky journey. The horses, the men, and the
sledges were white.


“Where do all these people come from?” I asked as my three horses and the
doctor’s two moved at a walking pace out of the yard.


“They are all his serfs,” said Sobol. “The new order has not reached him
yet. Some of the old servants are living out their lives with him, and
then there are orphans of all sorts who have nowhere to go; there are
some, too, who insist on living there, there’s no turning them out. A
queer old man!”


Again the flying horses, the strange voice of drunken Nikanor, the wind
and the persistent snow, which got into one’s eyes, one’s mouth, and every
fold of one’s fur coat....


“Well, I am running a rig,” I thought, while my bells chimed in with the
doctor’s, the wind whistled, the coachmen shouted; and while this frantic
uproar was going on, I recalled all the details of that strange wild day,
unique in my life, and it seemed to me that I really had gone out of my
mind or become a different man. It was as though the man I had been till
that day were already a stranger to me.


The doctor drove behind and kept talking loudly with his coachman. From
time to time he overtook me, drove side by side, and always, with the same
naive confidence that it was very pleasant to me, offered me a cigarette
or asked for the matches. Or, overtaking me, he would lean right out of
his sledge, and waving about the sleeves of his fur coat, which were at
least twice as long as his arms, shout:


“Go it, Vaska! Beat the thousand roublers! Hey, my kittens!”


And to the accompaniment of loud, malicious laughter from Sobol and his
Vaska the doctor’s kittens raced ahead. My Nikanor took it as an affront,
and held in his three horses, but when the doctor’s bells had passed out
of hearing, he raised his elbows, shouted, and our horses flew like mad in
pursuit. We drove into a village, there were glimpses of lights, the
silhouettes of huts. Some one shouted:


“Ah, the devils!” We seemed to have galloped a mile and a half, and still
it was the village street and there seemed no end to it. When we caught up
the doctor and drove more quietly, he asked for matches and said:


“Now try and feed that street! And, you know, there are five streets like
that, sir. Stay, stay,” he shouted. “Turn in at the tavern! We must get
warm and let the horses rest.”


They stopped at the tavern.


“I have more than one village like that in my district,” said the doctor,
opening a heavy door with a squeaky block, and ushering me in front of
him. “If you look in broad daylight you can’t see to the end of the
street, and there are side-streets, too, and one can do nothing but
scratch one’s head. It’s hard to do anything.”


We went into the best room where there was a strong smell of table-cloths,
and at our entrance a sleepy peasant in a waistcoat and a shirt worn
outside his trousers jumped up from a bench. Sobol asked for some beer and
I asked for tea.


“It’s hard to do anything,” said Sobol. “Your wife has faith; I respect
her and have the greatest reverence for her, but I have no great faith
myself. As long as our relations to the people continue to have the
character of ordinary philanthropy, as shown in orphan asylums and
almshouses, so long we shall only be shuffling, shamming, and deceiving
ourselves, and nothing more. Our relations ought to be businesslike,
founded on calculation, knowledge, and justice. My Vaska has been working
for me all his life; his crops have failed, he is sick and starving. If I
give him fifteen kopecks a day, by so doing I try to restore him to his
former condition as a workman; that is, I am first and foremost looking
after my own interests, and yet for some reason I call that fifteen
kopecks relief, charity, good works. Now let us put it like this. On the
most modest computation, reckoning seven kopecks a soul and five souls a
family, one needs three hundred and fifty roubles a day to feed a thousand
families. That sum is fixed by our practical duty to a thousand families.
Meanwhile we give not three hundred and fifty a day, but only ten, and say
that that is relief, charity, that that makes your wife and all of us
exceptionally good people and hurrah for our humaneness. That is it, my
dear soul! Ah! if we would talk less of being humane and calculated more,
reasoned, and took a conscientious attitude to our duties! How many such
humane, sensitive people there are among us who tear about in all good
faith with subscription lists, but don’t pay their tailors or their cooks.
There is no logic in our life; that’s what it is! No logic!”


We were silent for a while. I was making a mental calculation and said:


“I will feed a thousand families for two hundred days. Come and see me
tomorrow to talk it over.”


I was pleased that this was said quite simply, and was glad that Sobol
answered me still more simply:


“Right.”


We paid for what we had and went out of the tavern.


“I like going on like this,” said Sobol, getting into the sledge.
“Eccellenza, oblige me with a match. I’ve forgotten mine in the tavern.”


A quarter of an hour later his horses fell behind, and the sound of his
bells was lost in the roar of the snow-storm. Reaching home, I walked
about my rooms, trying to think things over and to define my position
clearly to myself; I had not one word, one phrase, ready for my wife. My
brain was not working.


But without thinking of anything, I went downstairs to my wife. She was in
her room, in the same pink dressing-gown, and standing in the same
attitude as though screening her papers from me. On her face was an
expression of perplexity and irony, and it was evident that having heard
of my arrival, she had prepared herself not to cry, not to entreat me, not
to defend herself, as she had done the day before, but to laugh at me, to
answer me contemptuously, and to act with decision. Her face was saying:
“If that’s how it is, good-bye.”


“Natalie, I’ve not gone away,” I said, “but it’s not deception. I have
gone out of my mind; I’ve grown old, I’m ill, I’ve become a different man—think
as you like.... I’ve shaken off my old self with horror, with horror; I
despise him and am ashamed of him, and the new man who has been in me
since yesterday will not let me go away. Do not drive me away, Natalie!”


She looked intently into my face and believed me, and there was a gleam of
uneasiness in her eyes. Enchanted by her presence, warmed by the warmth of
her room, I muttered as in delirium, holding out my hands to her:


“I tell you, I have no one near to me but you. I have never for one minute
ceased to miss you, and only obstinate vanity prevented me from owning it.
The past, when we lived as husband and wife, cannot be brought back, and
there’s no need; but make me your servant, take all my property, and give
it away to any one you like. I am at peace, Natalie, I am content.... I am
at peace.”


My wife, looking intently and with curiosity into my face, suddenly
uttered a faint cry, burst into tears, and ran into the next room. I went
upstairs to my own storey.


An hour later I was sitting at my table, writing my “History of Railways,”
and the starving peasants did not now hinder me from doing so. Now I feel
no uneasiness. Neither the scenes of disorder which I saw when I went the
round of the huts at Pestrovo with my wife and Sobol the other day, nor
malignant rumours, nor the mistakes of the people around me, nor old age
close upon me—nothing disturbs me. Just as the flying bullets do not
hinder soldiers from talking of their own affairs, eating and cleaning
their boots, so the starving peasants do not hinder me from sleeping
quietly and looking after my personal affairs. In my house and far around
it there is in full swing the work which Dr. Sobol calls “an orgy of
philanthropy.” My wife often comes up to me and looks about my rooms
uneasily, as though looking for what more she can give to the starving
peasants “to justify her existence,” and I see that, thanks to her, there
will soon be nothing of our property left and we shall be poor; but that
does not trouble me, and I smile at her gaily. What will happen in the
future I don’t know.








DIFFICULT PEOPLE

YEVGRAF IVANOVITCH SHIRYAEV, a small farmer, whose father, a parish
priest, now deceased, had received a gift of three hundred acres of land
from Madame Kuvshinnikov, a general’s widow, was standing in a corner
before a copper washing-stand, washing his hands. As usual, his face
looked anxious and ill-humoured, and his beard was uncombed.


“What weather!” he said. “It’s not weather, but a curse laid upon us. It’s
raining again!”


He grumbled on, while his family sat waiting at table for him to have
finished washing his hands before beginning dinner. Fedosya Semyonovna,
his wife, his son Pyotr, a student, his eldest daughter Varvara, and three
small boys, had been sitting waiting a long time. The boys—Kolka,
Vanka, and Arhipka—grubby, snub-nosed little fellows with chubby
faces and tousled hair that wanted cutting, moved their chairs
impatiently, while their elders sat without stirring, and apparently did
not care whether they ate their dinner or waited....


As though trying their patience, Shiryaev deliberately dried his hands,
deliberately said his prayer, and sat down to the table without hurrying
himself. Cabbage-soup was served immediately. The sound of carpenters’
axes (Shiryaev was having a new barn built) and the laughter of Fomka,
their labourer, teasing the turkey, floated in from the courtyard.


Big, sparse drops of rain pattered on the window.


Pyotr, a round-shouldered student in spectacles, kept exchanging glances
with his mother as he ate his dinner. Several times he laid down his spoon
and cleared his throat, meaning to begin to speak, but after an intent
look at his father he fell to eating again. At last, when the porridge had
been served, he cleared his throat resolutely and said:


“I ought to go tonight by the evening train. I ought to have gone before; I
have missed a fortnight as it is. The lectures begin on the first of
September.”


“Well, go,” Shiryaev assented; “why are you lingering on here? Pack up and
go, and good luck to you.”


A minute passed in silence.


“He must have money for the journey, Yevgraf Ivanovitch,” the mother
observed in a low voice.


“Money? To be sure, you can’t go without money. Take it at once, since you
need it. You could have had it long ago!”


The student heaved a faint sigh and looked with relief at his mother.
Deliberately Shiryaev took a pocket-book out of his coat-pocket and put on
his spectacles.


“How much do you want?” he asked.


“The fare to Moscow is eleven roubles forty-two kopecks....”


“Ah, money, money!” sighed the father. (He always sighed when he saw
money, even when he was receiving it.) “Here are twelve roubles for you.
You will have change out of that which will be of use to you on the
journey.”


“Thank you.”


After waiting a little, the student said:


“I did not get lessons quite at first last year. I don’t know how it will
be this year; most likely it will take me a little time to find work. I
ought to ask you for fifteen roubles for my lodging and dinner.”


Shiryaev thought a little and heaved a sigh.


“You will have to make ten do,” he said. “Here, take it.”


The student thanked him. He ought to have asked him for something more,
for clothes, for lecture fees, for books, but after an intent look at his
father he decided not to pester him further.


The mother, lacking in diplomacy and prudence, like all mothers, could not
restrain herself, and said:


“You ought to give him another six roubles, Yevgraf Ivanovitch, for a pair
of boots. Why, just see, how can he go to Moscow in such wrecks?”


“Let him take my old ones; they are still quite good.”


“He must have trousers, anyway; he is a disgrace to look at.”


And immediately after that a storm-signal showed itself, at the sight of
which all the family trembled.


Shiryaev’s short, fat neck turned suddenly red as a beetroot. The colour
mounted slowly to his ears, from his ears to his temples, and by degrees
suffused his whole face. Yevgraf Ivanovitch shifted in his chair and
unbuttoned his shirt-collar to save himself from choking. He was evidently
struggling with the feeling that was mastering him. A deathlike silence
followed. The children held their breath. Fedosya Semyonovna, as though
she did not grasp what was happening to her husband, went on:


“He is not a little boy now, you know; he is ashamed to go about without
clothes.”


Shiryaev suddenly jumped up, and with all his might flung down his fat
pocket-book in the middle of the table, so that a hunk of bread flew off a
plate. A revolting expression of anger, resentment, avarice—all
mixed together—flamed on his face.


“Take everything!” he shouted in an unnatural voice; “plunder me! Take it
all! Strangle me!”


He jumped up from the table, clutched at his head, and ran staggering
about the room.


“Strip me to the last thread!” he shouted in a shrill voice. “Squeeze out
the last drop! Rob me! Wring my neck!”


The student flushed and dropped his eyes. He could not go on eating.
Fedosya Semyonovna, who had not after twenty-five years grown used to her
husband’s difficult character, shrank into herself and muttered something
in self-defence. An expression of amazement and dull terror came into her
wasted and birdlike face, which at all times looked dull and scared. The
little boys and the elder daughter Varvara, a girl in her teens, with a
pale ugly face, laid down their spoons and sat mute.


Shiryaev, growing more and more ferocious, uttering words each more
terrible than the one before, dashed up to the table and began shaking the
notes out of his pocket-book.


“Take them!” he muttered, shaking all over. “You’ve eaten and drunk your
fill, so here’s money for you too! I need nothing! Order yourself new
boots and uniforms!”


The student turned pale and got up.


“Listen, papa,” he began, gasping for breath. “I... I beg you to end this,
for...”


“Hold your tongue!” the father shouted at him, and so loudly that the
spectacles fell off his nose; “hold your tongue!”


“I used... I used to be able to put up with such scenes, but... but now I
have got out of the way of it. Do you understand? I have got out of the
way of it!”


“Hold your tongue!” cried the father, and he stamped with his feet. “You
must listen to what I say! I shall say what I like, and you hold your
tongue. At your age I was earning my living, while you... Do you know what
you cost me, you scoundrel? I’ll turn you out! Wastrel!”


“Yevgraf Ivanovitch,” muttered Fedosya Semyonovna, moving her fingers
nervously; “you know he... you know Petya...!”


“Hold your tongue!” Shiryaev shouted out to her, and tears actually came
into his eyes from anger. “It is you who have spoilt them—you! It’s
all your fault! He has no respect for us, does not say his prayers, and
earns nothing! I am only one against the ten of you! I’ll turn you out of
the house!”


The daughter Varvara gazed fixedly at her mother with her mouth open,
moved her vacant-looking eyes to the window, turned pale, and, uttering a
loud shriek, fell back in her chair. The father, with a curse and a wave
of the hand, ran out into the yard.


This was how domestic scenes usually ended at the Shiryaevs’. But on this
occasion, unfortunately, Pyotr the student was carried away by
overmastering anger. He was just as hasty and ill-tempered as his father
and his grandfather the priest, who used to beat his parishioners about
the head with a stick. Pale and clenching his fists, he went up to his
mother and shouted in the very highest tenor note his voice could reach:


“These reproaches are loathsome! sickening to me! I want nothing from you!
Nothing! I would rather die of hunger than eat another mouthful at your
expense! Take your nasty money back! take it!”


The mother huddled against the wall and waved her hands, as though it were
not her son, but some phantom before her. “What have I done?” she wailed.
“What?”


Like his father, the boy waved his hands and ran into the yard. Shiryaev’s
house stood alone on a ravine which ran like a furrow for four miles along
the steppe. Its sides were overgrown with oak saplings and alders, and a
stream ran at the bottom. On one side the house looked towards the ravine,
on the other towards the open country, there were no fences nor hurdles.
Instead there were farm-buildings of all sorts close to one another,
shutting in a small space in front of the house which was regarded as the
yard, and in which hens, ducks, and pigs ran about.


Going out of the house, the student walked along the muddy road towards
the open country. The air was full of a penetrating autumn dampness. The
road was muddy, puddles gleamed here and there, and in the yellow fields
autumn itself seemed looking out from the grass, dismal, decaying, dark.
On the right-hand side of the road was a vegetable-garden cleared of its
crops and gloomy-looking, with here and there sunflowers standing up in it
with hanging heads already black.


Pyotr thought it would not be a bad thing to walk to Moscow on foot; to
walk just as he was, with holes in his boots, without a cap, and without a
farthing of money. When he had gone eighty miles his father, frightened
and aghast, would overtake him, would begin begging him to turn back or
take the money, but he would not even look at him, but would go on and
on.... Bare forests would be followed by desolate fields, fields by
forests again; soon the earth would be white with the first snow, and the
streams would be coated with ice.... Somewhere near Kursk or near
Serpuhovo, exhausted and dying of hunger, he would sink down and die. His
corpse would be found, and there would be a paragraph in all the papers
saying that a student called Shiryaev had died of hunger....


A white dog with a muddy tail who was wandering about the vegetable-garden
looking for something gazed at him and sauntered after him.


He walked along the road and thought of death, of the grief of his family,
of the moral sufferings of his father, and then pictured all sorts of
adventures on the road, each more marvellous than the one before—picturesque
places, terrible nights, chance encounters. He imagined a string of
pilgrims, a hut in the forest with one little window shining in the
darkness; he stands before the window, begs for a night’s lodging.... They
let him in, and suddenly he sees that they are robbers. Or, better still,
he is taken into a big manor-house, where, learning who he is, they give
him food and drink, play to him on the piano, listen to his complaints,
and the daughter of the house, a beauty, falls in love with him.


Absorbed in his bitterness and such thoughts, young Shiryaev walked on and
on. Far, far ahead he saw the inn, a dark patch against the grey
background of cloud. Beyond the inn, on the very horizon, he could see a
little hillock; this was the railway-station. That hillock reminded him of
the connection existing between the place where he was now standing and
Moscow, where street-lamps were burning and carriages were rattling in the
streets, where lectures were being given. And he almost wept with
depression and impatience. The solemn landscape, with its order and
beauty, the deathlike stillness all around, revolted him and moved him to
despair and hatred!


“Look out!” He heard behind him a loud voice.


An old lady of his acquaintance, a landowner of the neighbourhood, drove
past him in a light, elegant landau. He bowed to her, and smiled all over
his face. And at once he caught himself in that smile, which was so out of
keeping with his gloomy mood. Where did it come from if his whole heart
was full of vexation and misery? And he thought nature itself had given
man this capacity for lying, that even in difficult moments of spiritual
strain he might be able to hide the secrets of his nest as the fox and the
wild duck do. Every family has its joys and its horrors, but however great
they may be, it’s hard for an outsider’s eye to see them; they are a
secret. The father of the old lady who had just driven by, for instance,
had for some offence lain for half his lifetime under the ban of the wrath
of Tsar Nicolas I.; her husband had been a gambler; of her four sons, not
one had turned out well. One could imagine how many terrible scenes there
must have been in her life, how many tears must have been shed. And yet
the old lady seemed happy and satisfied, and she had answered his smile by
smiling too. The student thought of his comrades, who did not like talking
about their families; he thought of his mother, who almost always lied
when she had to speak of her husband and children....


Pyotr walked about the roads far from home till dusk, abandoning himself
to dreary thoughts. When it began to drizzle with rain he turned
homewards. As he walked back he made up his mind at all costs to talk to
his father, to explain to him, once and for all, that it was dreadful and
oppressive to live with him.


He found perfect stillness in the house. His sister Varvara was lying
behind a screen with a headache, moaning faintly. His mother, with a look
of amazement and guilt upon her face, was sitting beside her on a box,
mending Arhipka’s trousers. Yevgraf Ivanovitch was pacing from one window
to another, scowling at the weather. From his walk, from the way he
cleared his throat, and even from the back of his head, it was evident he
felt himself to blame.


“I suppose you have changed your mind about going today?” he asked.


The student felt sorry for him, but immediately suppressing that feeling,
he said:


“Listen... I must speak to you seriously... yes, seriously. I have always
respected you, and... and have never brought myself to speak to you in
such a tone, but your behaviour... your last action...”


The father looked out of the window and did not speak. The student, as
though considering his words, rubbed his forehead and went on in great
excitement:


“Not a dinner or tea passes without your making an uproar. Your bread
sticks in our throat... nothing is more bitter, more humiliating, than
bread that sticks in one’s throat.... Though you are my father, no one,
neither God nor nature, has given you the right to insult and humiliate us
so horribly, to vent your ill-humour on the weak. You have worn my mother
out and made a slave of her, my sister is hopelessly crushed, while I...”


“It’s not your business to teach me,” said his father.


“Yes, it is my business! You can quarrel with me as much as you like, but
leave my mother in peace! I will not allow you to torment my mother!” the
student went on, with flashing eyes. “You are spoilt because no one has
yet dared to oppose you. They tremble and are mute towards you, but now
that is over! Coarse, ill-bred man! You are coarse... do you understand?
You are coarse, ill-humoured, unfeeling. And the peasants can’t endure
you!”


The student had by now lost his thread, and was not so much speaking as
firing off detached words. Yevgraf Ivanovitch listened in silence, as
though stunned; but suddenly his neck turned crimson, the colour crept up
his face, and he made a movement.


“Hold your tongue!” he shouted.


“That’s right!” the son persisted; “you don’t like to hear the truth!
Excellent! Very good! begin shouting! Excellent!”


“Hold your tongue, I tell you!” roared Yevgraf Ivanovitch.


Fedosya Semyonovna appeared in the doorway, very pale, with an astonished
face; she tried to say something, but she could not, and could only move
her fingers.


“It’s all your fault!” Shiryaev shouted at her. “You have brought him up
like this!”


“I don’t want to go on living in this house!” shouted the student, crying,
and looking angrily at his mother. “I don’t want to live with you!”


Varvara uttered a shriek behind the screen and broke into loud sobs. With
a wave of his hand, Shiryaev ran out of the house.


The student went to his own room and quietly lay down. He lay till
midnight without moving or opening his eyes. He felt neither anger nor
shame, but a vague ache in his soul. He neither blamed his father nor
pitied his mother, nor was he tormented by stings of conscience; he
realized that every one in the house was feeling the same ache, and God
only knew which was most to blame, which was suffering most....


At midnight he woke the labourer, and told him to have the horse ready at
five o’clock in the morning for him to drive to the station; he undressed
and got into bed, but could not get to sleep. He heard how his father,
still awake, paced slowly from window to window, sighing, till early
morning. No one was asleep; they spoke rarely, and only in whispers. Twice
his mother came to him behind the screen. Always with the same look of
vacant wonder, she slowly made the cross over him, shaking nervously.


At five o’clock in the morning he said good-bye to them all
affectionately, and even shed tears. As he passed his father’s room, he
glanced in at the door. Yevgraf Ivanovitch, who had not taken off his
clothes or gone to bed, was standing by the window, drumming on the panes.


“Good-bye; I am going,” said his son.


“Good-bye... the money is on the round table...” his father answered,
without turning round.


A cold, hateful rain was falling as the labourer drove him to the station.
The sunflowers were drooping their heads still lower, and the grass seemed
darker than ever.








THE GRASSHOPPER


I

ALL Olga Ivanovna’s friends and acquaintances were at her wedding.


“Look at him; isn’t it true that there is something in him?” she said to
her friends, with a nod towards her husband, as though she wanted to
explain why she was marrying a simple, very ordinary, and in no way
remarkable man.


Her husband, Osip Stepanitch Dymov, was a doctor, and only of the rank of
a titular councillor. He was on the staff of two hospitals: in one a
ward-surgeon and in the other a dissecting demonstrator. Every day from
nine to twelve he saw patients and was busy in his ward, and after twelve
o’clock he went by tram to the other hospital, where he dissected. His
private practice was a small one, not worth more than five hundred roubles
a year. That was all. What more could one say about him? Meanwhile, Olga
Ivanovna and her friends and acquaintances were not quite ordinary people.
Every one of them was remarkable in some way, and more or less famous;
already had made a reputation and was looked upon as a celebrity; or if
not yet a celebrity, gave brilliant promise of becoming one. There was an
actor from the Dramatic Theatre, who was a great talent of established
reputation, as well as an elegant, intelligent, and modest man, and a
capital elocutionist, and who taught Olga Ivanovna to recite; there was a
singer from the opera, a good-natured, fat man who assured Olga Ivanovna,
with a sigh, that she was ruining herself, that if she would take herself
in hand and not be lazy she might make a remarkable singer; then there
were several artists, and chief among them Ryabovsky, a very handsome,
fair young man of five-and-twenty who painted genre pieces, animal
studies, and landscapes, was successful at exhibitions, and had sold his
last picture for five hundred roubles. He touched up Olga Ivanovna’s
sketches, and used to say she might do something. Then a violoncellist,
whose instrument used to sob, and who openly declared that of all the
ladies of his acquaintance the only one who could accompany him was Olga
Ivanovna; then there was a literary man, young but already well known, who
had written stories, novels, and plays. Who else? Why, Vassily
Vassilyitch, a landowner and amateur illustrator and vignettist, with a
great feeling for the old Russian style, the old ballad and epic. On
paper, on china, and on smoked plates, he produced literally marvels. In
the midst of this free artistic company, spoiled by fortune, though
refined and modest, who recalled the existence of doctors only in times of
illness, and to whom the name of Dymov sounded in no way different from
Sidorov or Tarasov—in the midst of this company Dymov seemed
strange, not wanted, and small, though he was tall and broad-shouldered.
He looked as though he had on somebody else’s coat, and his beard was like
a shopman’s. Though if he had been a writer or an artist, they would have
said that his beard reminded them of Zola.


An artist said to Olga Ivanovna that with her flaxen hair and in her
wedding-dress she was very much like a graceful cherry-tree when it is
covered all over with delicate white blossoms in spring.


“Oh, let me tell you,” said Olga Ivanovna, taking his arm, “how it was it
all came to pass so suddenly. Listen, listen!... I must tell you that my
father was on the same staff at the hospital as Dymov. When my poor father
was taken ill, Dymov watched for days and nights together at his bedside.
Such self-sacrifice! Listen, Ryabovsky! You, my writer, listen; it is very
interesting! Come nearer. Such self-sacrifice, such genuine sympathy! I
sat up with my father, and did not sleep for nights, either. And all at
once—the princess had won the hero’s heart—my Dymov fell head
over ears in love. Really, fate is so strange at times! Well, after my
father’s death he came to see me sometimes, met me in the street, and one
fine evening, all at once he made me an offer... like snow upon my
head.... I lay awake all night, crying, and fell hellishly in love myself.
And here, as you see, I am his wife. There really is something strong,
powerful, bearlike about him, isn’t there? Now his face is turned
three-quarters towards us in a bad light, but when he turns round look at
his forehead. Ryabovsky, what do you say to that forehead? Dymov, we are
talking about you!” she called to her husband. “Come here; hold out your
honest hand to Ryabovsky.... That’s right, be friends.”


Dymov, with a naive and good-natured smile, held out his hand to
Ryabovsky, and said:


“Very glad to meet you. There was a Ryabovsky in my year at the medical
school. Was he a relation of yours?”


II


Olga Ivanovna was twenty-two, Dymov was thirty-one. They got on splendidly
together when they were married. Olga Ivanovna hung all her drawing-room
walls with her own and other people’s sketches, in frames and without
frames, and near the piano and furniture arranged picturesque corners with
Japanese parasols, easels, daggers, busts, photographs, and rags of many
colours.... In the dining-room she papered the walls with peasant
woodcuts, hung up bark shoes and sickles, stood in a corner a scythe and a
rake, and so achieved a dining-room in the Russian style. In her bedroom
she draped the ceiling and the walls with dark cloths to make it like a
cavern, hung a Venetian lantern over the beds, and at the door set a
figure with a halberd. And every one thought that the young people had a
very charming little home.


When she got up at eleven o’clock every morning, Olga Ivanovna played the
piano or, if it were sunny, painted something in oils. Then between twelve
and one she drove to her dressmaker’s. As Dymov and she had very little
money, only just enough, she and her dressmaker were often put to clever
shifts to enable her to appear constantly in new dresses and make a
sensation with them. Very often out of an old dyed dress, out of bits of
tulle, lace, plush, and silk, costing nothing, perfect marvels were
created, something bewitching—not a dress, but a dream. From the
dressmaker’s Olga Ivanovna usually drove to some actress of her
acquaintance to hear the latest theatrical gossip, and incidentally to try
and get hold of tickets for the first night of some new play or for a
benefit performance. From the actress’s she had to go to some artist’s
studio or to some exhibition or to see some celebrity—either to pay
a visit or to give an invitation or simply to have a chat. And everywhere
she met with a gay and friendly welcome, and was assured that she was
good, that she was sweet, that she was rare.... Those whom she called
great and famous received her as one of themselves, as an equal, and
predicted with one voice that, with her talents, her taste, and her
intelligence, she would do great things if she concentrated herself. She
sang, she played the piano, she painted in oils, she carved, she took part
in amateur performances; and all this not just anyhow, but all with
talent, whether she made lanterns for an illumination or dressed up or
tied somebody’s cravat—everything she did was exceptionally
graceful, artistic, and charming. But her talents showed themselves in
nothing so clearly as in her faculty for quickly becoming acquainted and
on intimate terms with celebrated people. No sooner did any one become
ever so little celebrated, and set people talking about him, than she made
his acquaintance, got on friendly terms the same day, and invited him to
her house. Every new acquaintance she made was a veritable fete for her.
She adored celebrated people, was proud of them, dreamed of them every
night. She craved for them, and never could satisfy her craving. The old
ones departed and were forgotten, new ones came to replace them, but to
these, too, she soon grew accustomed or was disappointed in them, and
began eagerly seeking for fresh great men, finding them and seeking for
them again. What for?


Between four and five she dined at home with her husband. His simplicity,
good sense, and kind-heartedness touched her and moved her up to
enthusiasm. She was constantly jumping up, impulsively hugging his head
and showering kisses on it.


“You are a clever, generous man, Dymov,” she used to say, “but you have
one very serious defect. You take absolutely no interest in art. You don’t
believe in music or painting.”


“I don’t understand them,” he would say mildly. “I have spent all my life
in working at natural science and medicine, and I have never had time to
take an interest in the arts.”


“But, you know, that’s awful, Dymov!”


“Why so? Your friends don’t know anything of science or medicine, but you
don’t reproach them with it. Every one has his own line. I don’t
understand landscapes and operas, but the way I look at it is that if one
set of sensible people devote their whole lives to them, and other
sensible people pay immense sums for them, they must be of use. I don’t
understand them, but not understanding does not imply disbelieving in
them.”


“Let me shake your honest hand!”


After dinner Olga Ivanovna would drive off to see her friends, then to a
theatre or to a concert, and she returned home after midnight. So it was
every day.


On Wednesdays she had “At Homes.” At these “At Homes” the hostess and her
guests did not play cards and did not dance, but entertained themselves
with various arts. An actor from the Dramatic Theatre recited, a singer
sang, artists sketched in the albums of which Olga Ivanovna had a great
number, the violoncellist played, and the hostess herself sketched,
carved, sang, and played accompaniments. In the intervals between the
recitations, music, and singing, they talked and argued about literature,
the theatre, and painting. There were no ladies, for Olga Ivanovna
considered all ladies wearisome and vulgar except actresses and her
dressmaker. Not one of these entertainments passed without the hostess
starting at every ring at the bell, and saying, with a triumphant
expression, “It is he,” meaning by “he,” of course, some new celebrity.
Dymov was not in the drawing-room, and no one remembered his existence.
But exactly at half-past eleven the door leading into the dining-room
opened, and Dymov would appear with his good-natured, gentle smile and
say, rubbing his hands:


“Come to supper, gentlemen.”


They all went into the dining-room, and every time found on the table
exactly the same things: a dish of oysters, a piece of ham or veal,
sardines, cheese, caviare, mushrooms, vodka, and two decanters of wine.


“My dear maitre d’ hotel!” Olga Ivanovna would say, clasping her
hands with enthusiasm, “you are simply fascinating! My friends, look at
his forehead! Dymov, turn your profile. Look! he has the face of a Bengal
tiger and an expression as kind and sweet as a gazelle. Ah, the darling!”


The visitors ate, and, looking at Dymov, thought, “He really is a nice
fellow”; but they soon forgot about him, and went on talking about the
theatre, music, and painting.


The young people were happy, and their life flowed on without a hitch.


The third week of their honeymoon was spent, however, not quite happily—sadly,
indeed. Dymov caught erysipelas in the hospital, was in bed for six days,
and had to have his beautiful black hair cropped. Olga Ivanovna sat beside
him and wept bitterly, but when he was better she put a white handkerchief
on his shaven head and began to paint him as a Bedouin. And they were both
in good spirits. Three days after he had begun to go back to the hospital
he had another mischance.


“I have no luck, little mother,” he said one day at dinner. “I had four
dissections to do today, and I cut two of my fingers at one. And I did not
notice it till I got home.”


Olga Ivanovna was alarmed. He smiled, and told her that it did not matter,
and that he often cut his hands when he was dissecting.


“I get absorbed, little mother, and grow careless.”


Olga Ivanovna dreaded symptoms of blood-poisoning, and prayed about it
every night, but all went well. And again life flowed on peaceful and
happy, free from grief and anxiety. The present was happy, and to follow
it spring was at hand, already smiling in the distance, and promising a
thousand delights. There would be no end to their happiness. In April, May
and June a summer villa a good distance out of town; walks, sketching,
fishing, nightingales; and then from July right on to autumn an artist’s
tour on the Volga, and in this tour Olga Ivanovna would take part as an
indispensable member of the society. She had already had made for her two
travelling dresses of linen, had bought paints, brushes, canvases, and a
new palette for the journey. Almost every day Ryabovsky visited her to see
what progress she was making in her painting; when she showed him her
painting, he used to thrust his hands deep into his pockets, compress his
lips, sniff, and say:


“Ye—es...! That cloud of yours is screaming: it’s not in the evening
light. The foreground is somehow chewed up, and there is something, you
know, not the thing.... And your cottage is weighed down and whines
pitifully. That corner ought to have been taken more in shadow, but on the
whole it is not bad; I like it.”


And the more incomprehensible he talked, the more readily Olga Ivanovna
understood him.


III


After dinner on the second day of Trinity week, Dymov bought some sweets
and some savouries and went down to the villa to see his wife. He had not
seen her for a fortnight, and missed her terribly. As he sat in the train
and afterwards as he looked for his villa in a big wood, he felt all the
while hungry and weary, and dreamed of how he would have supper in freedom
with his wife, then tumble into bed and to sleep. And he was delighted as
he looked at his parcel, in which there was caviare, cheese, and white
salmon.


The sun was setting by the time he found his villa and recognized it. The
old servant told him that her mistress was not at home, but that most
likely she would soon be in. The villa, very uninviting in appearance,
with low ceilings papered with writing-paper and with uneven floors full
of crevices, consisted only of three rooms. In one there was a bed, in the
second there were canvases, brushes, greasy papers, and men’s overcoats
and hats lying about on the chairs and in the windows, while in the third
Dymov found three unknown men; two were dark-haired and had beards, the
other was clean-shaven and fat, apparently an actor. There was a samovar
boiling on the table.


“What do you want?” asked the actor in a bass voice, looking at Dymov
ungraciously. “Do you want Olga Ivanovna? Wait a minute; she will be here
directly.”


Dymov sat down and waited. One of the dark-haired men, looking sleepily
and listlessly at him, poured himself out a glass of tea, and asked:


“Perhaps you would like some tea?”


Dymov was both hungry and thirsty, but he refused tea for fear of spoiling
his supper. Soon he heard footsteps and a familiar laugh; a door slammed,
and Olga Ivanovna ran into the room, wearing a wide-brimmed hat and
carrying a box in her hand; she was followed by Ryabovsky, rosy and
good-humoured, carrying a big umbrella and a camp-stool.


“Dymov!” cried Olga Ivanovna, and she flushed crimson with pleasure.
“Dymov!” she repeated, laying her head and both arms on his bosom. “Is
that you? Why haven’t you come for so long? Why? Why?”


“When could I, little mother? I am always busy, and whenever I am free it
always happens somehow that the train does not fit.”


“But how glad I am to see you! I have been dreaming about you the whole
night, the whole night, and I was afraid you must be ill. Ah! if you only
knew how sweet you are! You have come in the nick of time! You will be my
salvation! You are the only person who can save me! There is to be a most
original wedding here tomorrow,” she went on, laughing, and tying her
husband’s cravat. “A young telegraph clerk at the station, called
Tchikeldyeev, is going to be married. He is a handsome young man and—well,
not stupid, and you know there is something strong, bearlike in his
face... you might paint him as a young Norman. We summer visitors take a
great interest in him, and have promised to be at his wedding.... He is a
lonely, timid man, not well off, and of course it would be a shame not to
be sympathetic to him. Fancy! the wedding will be after the service; then
we shall all walk from the church to the bride’s lodgings... you see the
wood, the birds singing, patches of sunlight on the grass, and all of us
spots of different colours against the bright green background—very
original, in the style of the French impressionists. But, Dymov, what am I
to go to the church in?” said Olga Ivanovna, and she looked as though she
were going to cry. “I have nothing here, literally nothing! no dress, no
flowers, no gloves... you must save me. Since you have come, fate itself
bids you save me. Take the keys, my precious, go home and get my pink
dress from the wardrobe. You remember it; it hangs in front.... Then, in
the storeroom, on the floor, on the right side, you will see two cardboard
boxes. When you open the top one you will see tulle, heaps of tulle and
rags of all sorts, and under them flowers. Take out all the flowers
carefully, try not to crush them, darling; I will choose among them
later.... And buy me some gloves.”


“Very well,” said Dymov; “I will go tomorrow and send them to you.”


“Tomorrow?” asked Olga Ivanovna, and she looked at him surprised. “You
won’t have time tomorrow. The first train goes tomorrow at nine, and the
wedding’s at eleven. No, darling, it must be today; it absolutely must be
today. If you won’t be able to come tomorrow, send them by a messenger.
Come, you must run along.... The passenger train will be in directly;
don’t miss it, darling.”


“Very well.”


“Oh, how sorry I am to let you go!” said Olga Ivanovna, and tears came
into her eyes. “And why did I promise that telegraph clerk, like a silly?”


Dymov hurriedly drank a glass of tea, took a cracknel, and, smiling
gently, went to the station. And the caviare, the cheese, and the white
salmon were eaten by the two dark gentlemen and the fat actor.


IV


On a still moonlight night in July Olga Ivanovna was standing on the deck
of a Volga steamer and looking alternately at the water and at the
picturesque banks. Beside her was standing Ryabovsky, telling her the
black shadows on the water were not shadows, but a dream, that it would be
sweet to sink into forgetfulness, to die, to become a memory in the sight
of that enchanted water with the fantastic glimmer, in sight of the
fathomless sky and the mournful, dreamy shores that told of the vanity of
our life and of the existence of something higher, blessed, and eternal.
The past was vulgar and uninteresting, the future was trivial, and that
marvellous night, unique in a lifetime, would soon be over, would blend
with eternity; then, why live?


And Olga Ivanovna listened alternately to Ryabovsky’s voice and the
silence of the night, and thought of her being immortal and never dying.
The turquoise colour of the water, such as she had never seen before, the
sky, the river-banks, the black shadows, and the unaccountable joy that
flooded her soul, all told her that she would make a great artist, and
that somewhere in the distance, in the infinite space beyond the
moonlight, success, glory, the love of the people, lay awaiting her....
When she gazed steadily without bIlinking into the distance, she seemed to
see crowds of people, lights, triumphant strains of music, cries of
enthusiasm, she herself in a white dress, and flowers showered upon her
from all sides. She thought, too, that beside her, leaning with his elbows
on the rail of the steamer, there was standing a real great man, a genius,
one of God’s elect.... All that he had created up to the present was fine,
new, and extraordinary, but what he would create in time, when with
maturity his rare talent reached its full development, would be
astounding, immeasurably sublime; and that could be seen by his face, by
his manner of expressing himself and his attitude to nature. He talked of
shadows, of the tones of evening, of the moonlight, in a special way, in a
language of his own, so that one could not help feeling the fascination of
his power over nature. He was very handsome, original, and his life, free,
independent, aloof from all common cares, was like the life of a bird.


“It’s growing cooler,” said Olga Ivanovna, and she gave a shudder.


Ryabovsky wrapped her in his cloak, and said mournfully:


“I feel that I am in your power; I am a slave. Why are you so enchanting
today?”


He kept staring intently at her, and his eyes were terrible. And she was
afraid to look at him.


“I love you madly,” he whispered, breathing on her cheek. “Say one word to
me and I will not go on living; I will give up art...” he muttered in
violent emotion. “Love me, love....”


“Don’t talk like that,” said Olga Ivanovna, covering her eyes. “It’s
dreadful! How about Dymov?”


“What of Dymov? Why Dymov? What have I to do with Dymov? The Volga, the
moon, beauty, my love, ecstasy, and there is no such thing as Dymov....
Ah! I don’t know... I don’t care about the past; give me one moment, one
instant!”


Olga Ivanovna’s heart began to throb. She tried to think about her
husband, but all her past, with her wedding, with Dymov, and with her “At
Homes,” seemed to her petty, trivial, dingy, unnecessary, and far, far
away.... Yes, really, what of Dymov? Why Dymov? What had she to do with
Dymov? Had he any existence in nature, or was he only a dream?


“For him, a simple and ordinary man the happiness he has had already is
enough,” she thought, covering her face with her hands. “Let them condemn
me, let them curse me, but in spite of them all I will go to my ruin; I
will go to my ruin!... One must experience everything in life. My God! how
terrible and how glorious!”


“Well? Well?” muttered the artist, embracing her, and greedily kissing the
hands with which she feebly tried to thrust him from her. “You love me?
Yes? Yes? Oh, what a night! marvellous night!”


“Yes, what a night!” she whispered, looking into his eyes, which were
bright with tears.


Then she looked round quickly, put her arms round him, and kissed him on
the lips.


“We are nearing Kineshmo!” said some one on the other side of the deck.


They heard heavy footsteps; it was a waiter from the refreshment-bar.


“Waiter,” said Olga Ivanovna, laughing and crying with happiness, “bring
us some wine.”


The artist, pale with emotion, sat on the seat, looking at Olga Ivanovna
with adoring, grateful eyes; then he closed his eyes, and said, smiling
languidly:


“I am tired.”


And he leaned his head against the rail.


V


On the second of September the day was warm and still, but overcast. In
the early morning a light mist had hung over the Volga, and after nine
o’clock it had begun to spout with rain. And there seemed no hope of the
sky clearing. Over their morning tea Ryabovsky told Olga Ivanovna that
painting was the most ungrateful and boring art, that he was not an
artist, that none but fools thought that he had any talent, and all at
once, for no rhyme or reason, he snatched up a knife and with it scraped
over his very best sketch. After his tea he sat plunged in gloom at the
window and gazed at the Volga. And now the Volga was dingy, all of one
even colour without a gleam of light, cold-looking. Everything, everything
recalled the approach of dreary, gloomy autumn. And it seemed as though
nature had removed now from the Volga the sumptuous green covers from the
banks, the brilliant reflections of the sunbeams, the transparent blue
distance, and all its smart gala array, and had packed it away in boxes
till the coming spring, and the crows were flying above the Volga and
crying tauntingly, “Bare, bare!”


Ryabovsky heard their cawing, and thought he had already gone off and lost
his talent, that everything in this world was relative, conditional, and
stupid, and that he ought not to have taken up with this woman.... In
short, he was out of humour and depressed.


Olga Ivanovna sat behind the screen on the bed, and, passing her fingers
through her lovely flaxen hair, pictured herself first in the
drawing-room, then in the bedroom, then in her husband’s study; her
imagination carried her to the theatre, to the dress-maker, to her
distinguished friends. Were they getting something up now? Did they think
of her? The season had begun by now, and it would be time to think about
her “At Homes.” And Dymov? Dear Dymov! with what gentleness and childlike
pathos he kept begging her in his letters to make haste and come home!
Every month he sent her seventy-five roubles, and when she wrote him that
she had lent the artists a hundred roubles, he sent that hundred too. What
a kind, generous-hearted man! The travelling wearied Olga Ivanovna; she
was bored; and she longed to get away from the peasants, from the damp
smell of the river, and to cast off the feeling of physical uncleanliness
of which she was conscious all the time, living in the peasants’ huts and
wandering from village to village. If Ryabovsky had not given his word to
the artists that he would stay with them till the twentieth of September,
they might have gone away that very day. And how nice that would have
been!


“My God!” moaned Ryabovsky. “Will the sun ever come out? I can’t go on
with a sunny landscape without the sun....”


“But you have a sketch with a cloudy sky,” said Olga Ivanovna, coming from
behind the screen. “Do you remember, in the right foreground forest trees,
on the left a herd of cows and geese? You might finish it now.”


“Aie!” the artist scowled. “Finish it! Can you imagine I am such a fool
that I don’t know what I want to do?”


“How you have changed to me!” sighed Olga Ivanovna.


“Well, a good thing too!”


Olga Ivanovna’s face quivered; she moved away to the stove and began to
cry.


“Well, that’s the last straw—crying! Give over! I have a thousand
reasons for tears, but I am not crying.”


“A thousand reasons!” cried Olga Ivanovna. “The chief one is that you are
weary of me. Yes!” she said, and broke into sobs. “If one is to tell the
truth, you are ashamed of our love. You keep trying to prevent the artists
from noticing it, though it is impossible to conceal it, and they have
known all about it for ever so long.”


“Olga, one thing I beg you,” said the artist in an imploring voice, laying
his hand on his heart—“one thing; don’t worry me! I want nothing
else from you!”


“But swear that you love me still!”


“This is agony!” the artist hissed through his teeth, and he jumped up.
“It will end by my throwing myself in the Volga or going out of my mind!
Let me alone!”


“Come, kill me, kill me!” cried Olga Ivanovna. “Kill me!”


She sobbed again, and went behind the screen. There was a swish of rain on
the straw thatch of the hut. Ryabovsky clutched his head and strode up and
down the hut; then with a resolute face, as though bent on proving
something to somebody, put on his cap, slung his gun over his shoulder,
and went out of the hut.


After he had gone, Olga Ivanovna lay a long time on the bed, crying. At
first she thought it would be a good thing to poison herself, so that when
Ryabovsky came back he would find her dead; then her imagination carried
her to her drawing-room, to her husband’s study, and she imagined herself
sitting motionless beside Dymov and enjoying the physical peace and
cleanliness, and in the evening sitting in the theatre, listening to
Mazini. And a yearning for civilization, for the noise and bustle of the
town, for celebrated people sent a pang to her heart. A peasant woman came
into the hut and began in a leisurely way lighting the stove to get the
dinner. There was a smell of charcoal fumes, and the air was filled with
bluish smoke. The artists came in, in muddy high boots and with faces wet
with rain, examined their sketches, and comforted themselves by saying
that the Volga had its charms even in bad weather. On the wall the cheap
clock went “tic-tic-tic.”... The flies, feeling chilled, crowded round the
ikon in the corner, buzzing, and one could hear the cockroaches scurrying
about among the thick portfolios under the seats....


Ryabovsky came home as the sun was setting. He flung his cap on the table,
and, without removing his muddy boots, sank pale and exhausted on the
bench and closed his eyes.


“I am tired...” he said, and twitched his eyebrows, trying to raise his
eyelids.


To be nice to him and to show she was not cross, Olga Ivanovna went up to
him, gave him a silent kiss, and passed the comb through his fair hair.
She meant to comb it for him.


“What’s that?” he said, starting as though something cold had touched him,
and he opened his eyes. “What is it? Please let me alone.”


He thrust her off, and moved away. And it seemed to her that there was a
look of aversion and annoyance on his face.


At that time the peasant woman cautiously carried him, in both hands, a
plate of cabbage-soup. And Olga Ivanovna saw how she wetted her fat
fingers in it. And the dirty peasant woman, standing with her body thrust
forward, and the cabbage-soup which Ryabovsky began eating greedily, and
the hut, and their whole way of life, which she at first had so loved for
its simplicity and artistic disorder, seemed horrible to her now. She
suddenly felt insulted, and said coldly:


“We must part for a time, or else from boredom we shall quarrel in
earnest. I am sick of this; I am going today.”


“Going how? Astride on a broomstick?”


“Today is Thursday, so the steamer will be here at half-past nine.”


“Eh? Yes, yes.... Well, go, then...” Ryabovsky said softly, wiping his
mouth with a towel instead of a dinner napkin. “You are dull and have
nothing to do here, and one would have to be a great egoist to try and
keep you. Go home, and we shall meet again after the twentieth.”


Olga Ivanovna packed in good spirits. Her cheeks positively glowed with
pleasure. Could it really be true, she asked herself, that she would soon
be writing in her drawing-room and sleeping in her bedroom, and dining
with a cloth on the table? A weight was lifted from her heart, and she no
longer felt angry with the artist.


“My paints and brushes I will leave with you, Ryabovsky,” she said. “You
can bring what’s left.... Mind, now, don’t be lazy here when I am gone;
don’t mope, but work. You are such a splendid fellow, Ryabovsky!”


At ten o’clock Ryabovsky gave her a farewell kiss, in order, as she
thought, to avoid kissing her on the steamer before the artists, and went
with her to the landing-stage. The steamer soon came up and carried her
away.


She arrived home two and a half days later. Breathless with excitement,
she went, without taking off her hat or waterproof, into the drawing-room
and thence into the dining-room. Dymov, with his waistcoat unbuttoned and
no coat, was sitting at the table sharpening a knife on a fork; before him
lay a grouse on a plate. As Olga Ivanovna went into the flat she was
convinced that it was essential to hide everything from her husband, and
that she would have the strength and skill to do so; but now, when she saw
his broad, mild, happy smile, and shining, joyful eyes, she felt that to
deceive this man was as vile, as revolting, and as impossible and out of
her power as to bear false witness, to steal, or to kill, and in a flash
she resolved to tell him all that had happened. Letting him kiss and
embrace her, she sank down on her knees before him and hid her face.


“What is it, what is it, little mother?” he asked tenderly. “Were you
homesick?”


She raised her face, red with shame, and gazed at him with a guilty and
imploring look, but fear and shame prevented her from telling him the
truth.


“Nothing,” she said; “it’s just nothing....”


“Let us sit down,” he said, raising her and seating her at the table.
“That’s right, eat the grouse. You are starving, poor darling.”


She eagerly breathed in the atmosphere of home and ate the grouse, while
he watched her with tenderness and laughed with delight.


VI


Apparently, by the middle of the winter Dymov began to suspect that he was
being deceived. As though his conscience was not clear, he could not look
his wife straight in the face, did not smile with delight when he met her,
and to avoid being left alone with her, he often brought in to dinner his
colleague, Korostelev, a little close-cropped man with a wrinkled face,
who kept buttoning and unbuttoning his reefer jacket with embarrassment
when he talked with Olga Ivanovna, and then with his right hand nipped his
left moustache. At dinner the two doctors talked about the fact that a
displacement of the diaphragm was sometimes accompanied by irregularities
of the heart, or that a great number of neurotic complaints were met with
of late, or that Dymov had the day before found a cancer of the lower
abdomen while dissecting a corpse with the diagnosis of pernicious
anaemia. And it seemed as though they were talking of medicine to give
Olga Ivanovna a chance of being silent—that is, of not lying. After
dinner Korostelev sat down to the piano, while Dymov sighed and said to
him:


“Ech, brother—well, well! Play something melancholy.”


Hunching up his shoulders and stretching his fingers wide apart,
Korostelev played some chords and began singing in a tenor voice, “Show me
the abode where the Russian peasant would not groan,” while Dymov sighed
once more, propped his head on his fist, and sank into thought.


Olga Ivanovna had been extremely imprudent in her conduct of late. Every
morning she woke up in a very bad humour and with the thought that she no
longer cared for Ryabovsky, and that, thank God, it was all over now. But
as she drank her coffee she reflected that Ryabovsky had robbed her of her
husband, and that now she was left with neither her husband nor Ryabovsky;
then she remembered talks she had heard among her acquaintances of a
picture Ryabovsky was preparing for the exhibition, something striking, a
mixture of genre and landscape, in the style of Polyenov, about which
every one who had been into his studio went into raptures; and this, of
course, she mused, he had created under her influence, and altogether,
thanks to her influence, he had greatly changed for the better. Her
influence was so beneficent and essential that if she were to leave him he
might perhaps go to ruin. And she remembered, too, that the last time he
had come to see her in a great-coat with flecks on it and a new tie, he
had asked her languidly:


“Am I beautiful?”


And with his elegance, his long curls, and his blue eyes, he really was
very beautiful (or perhaps it only seemed so), and he had been
affectionate to her.


Considering and remembering many things Olga Ivanovna dressed and in great
agitation drove to Ryabovsky’s studio. She found him in high spirits, and
enchanted with his really magnificent picture. He was dancing about and
playing the fool and answering serious questions with jokes. Olga Ivanovna
was jealous of the picture and hated it, but from politeness she stood
before the picture for five minutes in silence, and, heaving a sigh, as
though before a holy shrine, said softly:


“Yes, you have never painted anything like it before. Do you know, it is
positively awe-inspiring?”


And then she began beseeching him to love her and not to cast her off, to
have pity on her in her misery and her wretchedness. She shed tears,
kissed his hands, insisted on his swearing that he loved her, told him
that without her good influence he would go astray and be ruined. And,
when she had spoilt his good-humour, feeling herself humiliated, she would
drive off to her dressmaker or to an actress of her acquaintance to try
and get theatre tickets.


If she did not find him at his studio she left a letter in which she swore
that if he did not come to see her that day she would poison herself. He
was scared, came to see her, and stayed to dinner. Regardless of her
husband’s presence, he would say rude things to her, and she would answer
him in the same way. Both felt they were a burden to each other, that they
were tyrants and enemies, and were wrathful, and in their wrath did not
notice that their behaviour was unseemly, and that even Korostelev, with
his close-cropped head, saw it all. After dinner Ryabovsky made haste to
say good-bye and get away.


“Where are you off to?” Olga Ivanovna would ask him in the hall, looking
at him with hatred.


Scowling and screwing up his eyes, he mentioned some lady of their
acquaintance, and it was evident that he was laughing at her jealousy and
wanted to annoy her. She went to her bedroom and lay down on her bed; from
jealousy, anger, a sense of humiliation and shame, she bit the pillow and
began sobbing aloud. Dymov left Korostelev in the drawing-room, went into
the bedroom, and with a desperate and embarrassed face said softly:


“Don’t cry so loud, little mother; there’s no need. You must be quiet
about it. You must not let people see.... You know what is done is done,
and can’t be mended.”


Not knowing how to ease the burden of her jealousy, which actually set her
temples throbbing with pain, and thinking still that things might be set
right, she would wash, powder her tear-stained face, and fly off to the
lady mentioned.


Not finding Ryabovsky with her, she would drive off to a second, then to a
third. At first she was ashamed to go about like this, but afterwards she
got used to it, and it would happen that in one evening she would make the
round of all her female acquaintances in search of Ryabovsky, and they all
understood it.


One day she said to Ryabovsky of her husband:


“That man crushes me with his magnanimity.”


This phrase pleased her so much that when she met the artists who knew of
her affair with Ryabovsky she said every time of her husband, with a
vigorous movement of her arm:


“That man crushes me with his magnanimity.”


Their manner of life was the same as it had been the year before. On
Wednesdays they were “At Home”; an actor recited, the artists sketched.
The violoncellist played, a singer sang, and invariably at half-past
eleven the door leading to the dining-room opened and Dymov, smiling,
said:


“Come to supper, gentlemen.”


As before, Olga Ivanovna hunted celebrities, found them, was not
satisfied, and went in pursuit of fresh ones. As before, she came back
late every night; but now Dymov was not, as last year, asleep, but sitting
in his study at work of some sort. He went to bed at three o’clock and got
up at eight.


One evening when she was getting ready to go to the theatre and standing
before the pier glass, Dymov came into her bedroom, wearing his dress-coat
and a white tie. He was smiling gently and looked into his wife’s face
joyfully, as in old days; his face was radiant.


“I have just been defending my thesis,” he said, sitting down and
smoothing his knees.


“Defending?” asked Olga Ivanovna.


“Oh, oh!” he laughed, and he craned his neck to see his wife’s face in the
mirror, for she was still standing with her back to him, doing up her
hair. “Oh, oh,” he repeated, “do you know it’s very possible they may
offer me the Readership in General Pathology? It seems like it.”


It was evident from his beaming, blissful face that if Olga Ivanovna had
shared with him his joy and triumph he would have forgiven her everything,
both the present and the future, and would have forgotten everything, but
she did not understand what was meant by a “readership” or by “general
pathology”; besides, she was afraid of being late for the theatre, and she
said nothing.


He sat there another two minutes, and with a guilty smile went away.


VII


It had been a very troubled day.


Dymov had a very bad headache; he had no breakfast, and did not go to the
hospital, but spent the whole time lying on his sofa in the study. Olga
Ivanovna went as usual at midday to see Ryabovsky, to show him her
still-life sketch, and to ask him why he had not been to see her the
evening before. The sketch seemed to her worthless, and she had painted it
only in order to have an additional reason for going to the artist.


She went in to him without ringing, and as she was taking off her goloshes
in the entry she heard a sound as of something running softly in the
studio, with a feminine rustle of skirts; and as she hastened to peep in
she caught a momentary glimpse of a bit of brown petticoat, which vanished
behind a big picture draped, together with the easel, with black calico,
to the floor. There could be no doubt that a woman was hiding there. How
often Olga Ivanovna herself had taken refuge behind that picture!


Ryabovsky, evidently much embarrassed, held out both hands to her, as
though surprised at her arrival, and said with a forced smile:


“Aha! Very glad to see you! Anything nice to tell me?”


Olga Ivanovna’s eyes filled with tears. She felt ashamed and bitter, and
would not for a million roubles have consented to speak in the presence of
the outsider, the rival, the deceitful woman who was standing now behind
the picture, and probably giggling malignantly.


“I have brought you a sketch,” she said timidly in a thin voice, and her
lips quivered. “Nature morte.”


“Ah—ah!... A sketch?”


The artist took the sketch in his hands, and as he examined it walked, as
it were mechanically, into the other room.


Olga Ivanovna followed him humbly.


“Nature morte... first-rate sort,” he muttered, falling into rhyme.
“Kurort... sport... port...”


From the studio came the sound of hurried footsteps and the rustle of a
skirt.


So she had gone. Olga Ivanovna wanted to scream aloud, to hit the artist
on the head with something heavy, but she could see nothing through her
tears, was crushed by her shame, and felt herself, not Olga Ivanovna, not
an artist, but a little insect.


“I am tired...” said the artist languidly, looking at the sketch and
tossing his head as though struggling with drowsiness. “It’s very nice, of
course, but here a sketch today, a sketch last year, another sketch in a
month... I wonder you are not bored with them. If I were you I should give
up painting and work seriously at music or something. You’re not an
artist, you know, but a musician. But you can’t think how tired I am! I’ll
tell them to bring us some tea, shall I?”


He went out of the room, and Olga Ivanovna heard him give some order to
his footman. To avoid farewells and explanations, and above all to avoid
bursting into sobs, she ran as fast as she could, before Ryabovsky came
back, to the entry, put on her goloshes, and went out into the street;
then she breathed easily, and felt she was free for ever from Ryabovsky
and from painting and from the burden of shame which had so crushed her in
the studio. It was all over!


She drove to her dressmaker’s; then to see Barnay, who had only arrived
the day before; from Barnay to a music-shop, and all the time she was
thinking how she would write Ryabovsky a cold, cruel letter full of
personal dignity, and how in the spring or the summer she would go with
Dymov to the Crimea, free herself finally from the past there, and begin a
new life.


On getting home late in the evening she sat down in the drawing-room,
without taking off her things, to begin the letter. Ryabovsky had told her
she was not an artist, and to pay him out she wrote to him now that he
painted the same thing every year, and said exactly the same thing every
day; that he was at a standstill, and that nothing more would come of him
than had come already. She wanted to write, too, that he owed a great deal
to her good influence, and that if he was going wrong it was only because
her influence was paralysed by various dubious persons like the one who
had been hiding behind the picture that day.


“Little mother!” Dymov called from the study, without opening the door.


“What is it?”


“Don’t come in to me, but only come to the door—that’s right.... The
day before yesterday I must have caught diphtheria at the hospital, and
now... I am ill. Make haste and send for Korostelev.”


Olga Ivanovna always called her husband by his surname, as she did all the
men of her acquaintance; she disliked his Christian name, Osip, because it
reminded her of the Osip in Gogol and the silly pun on his name. But now
she cried:


“Osip, it cannot be!”


“Send for him; I feel ill,” Dymov said behind the door, and she could hear
him go back to the sofa and lie down. “Send!” she heard his voice faintly.


“Good Heavens!” thought Olga Ivanovna, turning chill with horror. “Why,
it’s dangerous!”


For no reason she took the candle and went into the bedroom, and there,
reflecting what she must do, glanced casually at herself in the pier
glass. With her pale, frightened face, in a jacket with sleeves high on
the shoulders, with yellow ruches on her bosom, and with stripes running
in unusual directions on her skirt, she seemed to herself horrible and
disgusting. She suddenly felt poignantly sorry for Dymov, for his
boundless love for her, for his young life, and even for the desolate
little bed in which he had not slept for so long; and she remembered his
habitual, gentle, submissive smile. She wept bitterly, and wrote an
imploring letter to Korostelev. It was two o’clock in the night.


VIII


When towards eight o’clock in the morning Olga Ivanovna, her head heavy
from want of sleep and her hair unbrushed, came out of her bedroom,
looking unattractive and with a guilty expression on her face, a gentleman
with a black beard, apparently the doctor, passed by her into the entry.
There was a smell of drugs. Korostelev was standing near the study door,
twisting his left moustache with his right hand.


“Excuse me, I can’t let you go in,” he said surlily to Olga Ivanovna;
“it’s catching. Besides, it’s no use, really; he is delirious, anyway.”


“Has he really got diphtheria?” Olga Ivanovna asked in a whisper.


“People who wantonly risk infection ought to be hauled up and punished for
it,” muttered Korostelev, not answering Olga Ivanovna’s question. “Do you
know why he caught it? On Tuesday he was sucking up the mucus through a
pipette from a boy with diphtheria. And what for? It was stupid.... Just
from folly....”


“Is it dangerous, very?” asked Olga Ivanovna.


“Yes; they say it is the malignant form. We ought to send for Shrek
really.”


A little red-haired man with a long nose and a Jewish accent arrived; then
a tall, stooping, shaggy individual, who looked like a head deacon; then a
stout young man with a red face and spectacles. These were doctors who
came to watch by turns beside their colleague. Korostelev did not go home
when his turn was over, but remained and wandered about the rooms like an
uneasy spirit. The maid kept getting tea for the various doctors, and was
constantly running to the chemist, and there was no one to do the rooms.
There was a dismal stillness in the flat.


Olga Ivanovna sat in her bedroom and thought that God was punishing her
for having deceived her husband. That silent, unrepining, uncomprehended
creature, robbed by his mildness of all personality and will, weak from
excessive kindness, had been suffering in obscurity somewhere on his sofa,
and had not complained. And if he were to complain even in delirium, the
doctors watching by his bedside would learn that diphtheria was not the
only cause of his sufferings. They would ask Korostelev. He knew all about
it, and it was not for nothing that he looked at his friend’s wife with
eyes that seemed to say that she was the real chief criminal and
diphtheria was only her accomplice. She did not think now of the moonlight
evening on the Volga, nor the words of love, nor their poetical life in
the peasant’s hut. She thought only that from an idle whim, from
self-indulgence, she had sullied herself all over from head to foot in
something filthy, sticky, which one could never wash off....


“Oh, how fearfully false I’ve been!” she thought, recalling the troubled
passion she had known with Ryabovsky. “Curse it all!...”


At four o’clock she dined with Korostelev. He did nothing but scowl and
drink red wine, and did not eat a morsel. She ate nothing, either. At one
minute she was praying inwardly and vowing to God that if Dymov recovered
she would love him again and be a faithful wife to him. Then, forgetting
herself for a minute, she would look at Korostelev, and think: “Surely it
must be dull to be a humble, obscure person, not remarkable in any way,
especially with such a wrinkled face and bad manners!”


Then it seemed to her that God would strike her dead that minute for not
having once been in her husband’s study, for fear of infection. And
altogether she had a dull, despondent feeling and a conviction that her
life was spoilt, and that there was no setting it right anyhow....


After dinner darkness came on. When Olga Ivanovna went into the
drawing-room Korostelev was asleep on the sofa, with a gold-embroidered
silk cushion under his head.


“Khee-poo-ah,” he snored—“khee-poo-ah.”


And the doctors as they came to sit up and went away again did not notice
this disorder. The fact that a strange man was asleep and snoring in the
drawing-room, and the sketches on the walls and the exquisite decoration
of the room, and the fact that the lady of the house was dishevelled and
untidy—all that aroused not the slightest interest now. One of the
doctors chanced to laugh at something, and the laugh had a strange and
timid sound that made one’s heart ache.


When Olga Ivanovna went into the drawing-room next time, Korostelev was
not asleep, but sitting up and smoking.


“He has diphtheria of the nasal cavity,” he said in a low voice, “and the
heart is not working properly now. Things are in a bad way, really.”


“But you will send for Shrek?” said Olga Ivanovna.


“He has been already. It was he noticed that the diphtheria had passed
into the nose. What’s the use of Shrek! Shrek’s no use at all, really. He
is Shrek, I am Korostelev, and nothing more.”


The time dragged on fearfully slowly. Olga Ivanovna lay down in her
clothes on her bed, that had not been made all day, and sank into a doze.
She dreamed that the whole flat was filled up from floor to ceiling with a
huge piece of iron, and that if they could only get the iron out they
would all be light-hearted and happy. Waking, she realized that it was not
the iron but Dymov’s illness that was weighing on her.


“Nature morte, port...” she thought, sinking into forgetfulness again.
“Sport... Kurort... and what of Shrek? Shrek... trek... wreck.... And
where are my friends now? Do they know that we are in trouble? Lord,
save... spare! Shrek... trek...”


And again the iron was there.... The time dragged on slowly, though the
clock on the lower storey struck frequently. And bells were continually
ringing as the doctors arrived.... The house-maid came in with an empty
glass on a tray, and asked, “Shall I make the bed, madam?” and getting no
answer, went away.


The clock below struck the hour. She dreamed of the rain on the Volga; and
again some one came into her bedroom, she thought a stranger. Olga
Ivanovna jumped up, and recognized Korostelev.


“What time is it?” she asked.


“About three.”


“Well, what is it?”


“What, indeed!... I’ve come to tell you he is passing....”


He gave a sob, sat down on the bed beside her, and wiped away the tears
with his sleeve. She could not grasp it at once, but turned cold all over
and began slowly crossing herself.


“He is passing,” he repeated in a shrill voice, and again he gave a sob.
“He is dying because he sacrificed himself. What a loss for science!” he
said bitterly. “Compare him with all of us. He was a great man, an
extraordinary man! What gifts! What hopes we all had of him!” Korostelev
went on, wringing his hands: “Merciful God, he was a man of science; we
shall never look on his like again. Osip Dymov, what have you done—aie,
aie, my God!”


Korostelev covered his face with both hands in despair, and shook his
head.


“And his moral force,” he went on, seeming to grow more and more
exasperated against some one. “Not a man, but a pure, good, loving soul,
and clean as crystal. He served science and died for science. And he
worked like an ox night and day—no one spared him—and with his
youth and his learning he had to take a private practice and work at
translations at night to pay for these... vile rags!”


Korostelev looked with hatred at Olga Ivanovna, snatched at the sheet with
both hands and angrily tore it, as though it were to blame.


“He did not spare himself, and others did not spare him. Oh, what’s the
use of talking!”


“Yes, he was a rare man,” said a bass voice in the drawing-room.


Olga Ivanovna remembered her whole life with him from the beginning to the
end, with all its details, and suddenly she understood that he really was
an extraordinary, rare, and, compared with every one else she knew, a
great man. And remembering how her father, now dead, and all the other
doctors had behaved to him, she realized that they really had seen in him
a future celebrity. The walls, the ceiling, the lamp, and the carpet on
the floor, seemed to be winking at her sarcastically, as though they would
say, “You were blind! you were blind!” With a wail she flung herself out
of the bedroom, dashed by some unknown man in the drawing-room, and ran
into her husband’s study. He was lying motionless on the sofa, covered to
the waist with a quilt. His face was fearfully thin and sunken, and was of
a greyish-yellow colour such as is never seen in the living; only from the
forehead, from the black eyebrows and from the familiar smile, could he be
recognized as Dymov. Olga Ivanovna hurriedly felt his chest, his forehead,
and his hands. The chest was still warm, but the forehead and hands were
unpleasantly cold, and the half-open eyes looked, not at Olga Ivanovna,
but at the quilt.


“Dymov!” she called aloud, “Dymov!” She wanted to explain to him that it
had been a mistake, that all was not lost, that life might still be
beautiful and happy, that he was an extraordinary, rare, great man, and
that she would all her life worship him and bow down in homage and holy
awe before him....


“Dymov!” she called him, patting him on the shoulder, unable to believe
that he would never wake again. “Dymov! Dymov!”


In the drawing-room Korostelev was saying to the housemaid:


“Why keep asking? Go to the church beadle and enquire where they live.
They’ll wash the body and lay it out, and do everything that is
necessary.”








A DREARY STORY


FROM THE NOTEBOOK OF AN OLD MAN

T
HERE is in Russia an emeritus Professor Nikolay Stepanovitch, a chevalier
and privy councillor; he has so many Russian and foreign decorations that
when he has occasion to put them on the students nickname him “The
Ikonstand.” His acquaintances are of the most aristocratic; for the last
twenty-five or thirty years, at any rate, there has not been one single
distinguished man of learning in Russia with whom he has not been
intimately acquainted. There is no one for him to make friends with
nowadays; but if we turn to the past, the long list of his famous friends
winds up with such names as Pirogov, Kavelin, and the poet Nekrasov, all
of whom bestowed upon him a warm and sincere affection. He is a member of
all the Russian and of three foreign universities. And so on, and so on.
All that and a great deal more that might be said makes up what is called
my “name.”


That is my name as known to the public. In Russia it is known to every
educated man, and abroad it is mentioned in the lecture-room with the
addition “honoured and distinguished.” It is one of those fortunate names
to abuse which or to take which in vain, in public or in print, is
considered a sign of bad taste. And that is as it should be. You see, my
name is closely associated with the conception of a highly distinguished
man of great gifts and unquestionable usefulness. I have the industry and
power of endurance of a camel, and that is important, and I have talent,
which is even more important. Moreover, while I am on this subject, I am a
well-educated, modest, and honest fellow. I have never poked my nose into
literature or politics; I have never sought popularity in polemics with
the ignorant; I have never made speeches either at public dinners or at
the funerals of my friends.... In fact, there is no slur on my learned
name, and there is no complaint one can make against it. It is fortunate.


The bearer of that name, that is I, see myself as a man of sixty-two, with
a bald head, with false teeth, and with an incurable tic douloureux. I am
myself as dingy and unsightly as my name is brilliant and splendid. My
head and my hands tremble with weakness; my neck, as Turgenev says of one
of his heroines, is like the handle of a double bass; my chest is hollow;
my shoulders narrow; when I talk or lecture, my mouth turns down at one
corner; when I smile, my whole face is covered with aged-looking, deathly
wrinkles. There is nothing impressive about my pitiful figure; only,
perhaps, when I have an attack of tic douloureux my face wears a peculiar
expression, the sight of which must have roused in every one the grim and
impressive thought, “Evidently that man will soon die.”


I still, as in the past, lecture fairly well; I can still, as in the past,
hold the attention of my listeners for a couple of hours. My fervour, the
literary skill of my exposition, and my humour, almost efface the defects
of my voice, though it is harsh, dry, and monotonous as a praying
beggar’s. I write poorly. That bit of my brain which presides over the
faculty of authorship refuses to work. My memory has grown weak; there is
a lack of sequence in my ideas, and when I put them on paper it always
seems to me that I have lost the instinct for their organic connection; my
construction is monotonous; my language is poor and timid. Often I write
what I do not mean; I have forgotten the beginning when I am writing the
end. Often I forget ordinary words, and I always have to waste a great
deal of energy in avoiding superfluous phrases and unnecessary parentheses
in my letters, both unmistakable proofs of a decline in mental activity.
And it is noteworthy that the simpler the letter the more painful the
effort to write it. At a scientific article I feel far more intelligent
and at ease than at a letter of congratulation or a minute of proceedings.
Another point: I find it easier to write German or English than to write
Russian.


As regards my present manner of life, I must give a foremost place to the
insomnia from which I have suffered of late. If I were asked what
constituted the chief and fundamental feature of my existence now, I
should answer, Insomnia. As in the past, from habit I undress and go to
bed exactly at midnight. I fall asleep quickly, but before two o’clock I
wake up and feel as though I had not slept at all. Sometimes I get out of
bed and light a lamp. For an hour or two I walk up and down the room
looking at the familiar photographs and pictures. When I am weary of
walking about, I sit down to my table. I sit motionless, thinking of
nothing, conscious of no inclination; if a book is lying before me, I
mechanically move it closer and read it without any interest—in that
way not long ago I mechanically read through in one night a whole novel,
with the strange title “The Song the Lark was Singing”; or to occupy my
attention I force myself to count to a thousand; or I imagine the face of
one of my colleagues and begin trying to remember in what year and under
what circumstances he entered the service. I like listening to sounds. Two
rooms away from me my daughter Liza says something rapidly in her sleep,
or my wife crosses the drawing-room with a candle and invariably drops the
matchbox; or a warped cupboard creaks; or the burner of the lamp suddenly
begins to hum—and all these sounds, for some reason, excite me.


To lie awake at night means to be at every moment conscious of being
abnormal, and so I look forward with impatience to the morning and the day
when I have a right to be awake. Many wearisome hours pass before the cock
crows in the yard. He is my first bringer of good tidings. As soon as he
crows I know that within an hour the porter will wake up below, and,
coughing angrily, will go upstairs to fetch something. And then a pale
light will begin gradually glimmering at the windows, voices will sound in
the street....


The day begins for me with the entrance of my wife. She comes in to me in
her petticoat, before she has done her hair, but after she has washed,
smelling of flower-scented eau-de-Cologne, looking as though she had come
in by chance. Every time she says exactly the same thing: “Excuse me, I
have just come in for a minute.... Have you had a bad night again?”


Then she puts out the lamp, sits down near the table, and begins talking.
I am no prophet, but I know what she will talk about. Every morning it is
exactly the same thing. Usually, after anxious inquiries concerning my
health, she suddenly mentions our son who is an officer serving at Warsaw.
After the twentieth of each month we send him fifty roubles, and that
serves as the chief topic of our conversation.


“Of course it is difficult for us,” my wife would sigh, “but until he is
completely on his own feet it is our duty to help him. The boy is among
strangers, his pay is small.... However, if you like, next month we won’t
send him fifty, but forty. What do you think?”


Daily experience might have taught my wife that constantly talking of our
expenses does not reduce them, but my wife refuses to learn by experience,
and regularly every morning discusses our officer son, and tells me that
bread, thank God, is cheaper, while sugar is a halfpenny dearer—with
a tone and an air as though she were communicating interesting news.


I listen, mechanically assent, and probably because I have had a bad
night, strange and inappropriate thoughts intrude themselves upon me. I
gaze at my wife and wonder like a child. I ask myself in perplexity, is it
possible that this old, very stout, ungainly woman, with her dull
expression of petty anxiety and alarm about daily bread, with eyes dimmed
by continual brooding over debts and money difficulties, who can talk of
nothing but expenses and who smiles at nothing but things getting cheaper—is
it possible that this woman is no other than the slender Varya whom I fell
in love with so passionately for her fine, clear intelligence, for her
pure soul, her beauty, and, as Othello his Desdemona, for her “sympathy”
for my studies? Could that woman be no other than the Varya who had once
borne me a son?


I look with strained attention into the face of this flabby, spiritless,
clumsy old woman, seeking in her my Varya, but of her past self nothing is
left but her anxiety over my health and her manner of calling my salary
“our salary,” and my cap “our cap.” It is painful for me to look at her,
and, to give her what little comfort I can, I let her say what she likes,
and say nothing even when she passes unjust criticisms on other people or
pitches into me for not having a private practice or not publishing
text-books.


Our conversation always ends in the same way. My wife suddenly remembers
with dismay that I have not had my tea.


“What am I thinking about, sitting here?” she says, getting up. “The
samovar has been on the table ever so long, and here I stay gossiping. My
goodness! how forgetful I am growing!”


She goes out quickly, and stops in the doorway to say:


“We owe Yegor five months’ wages. Did you know it? You mustn’t let the
servants’ wages run on; how many times I have said it! It’s much easier to
pay ten roubles a month than fifty roubles every five months!”


As she goes out, she stops to say:


“The person I am sorriest for is our Liza. The girl studies at the
Conservatoire, always mixes with people of good position, and goodness
knows how she is dressed. Her fur coat is in such a state she is ashamed
to show herself in the street. If she were somebody else’s daughter it
wouldn’t matter, but of course every one knows that her father is a
distinguished professor, a privy councillor.”


And having reproached me with my rank and reputation, she goes away at
last. That is how my day begins. It does not improve as it goes on.


As I am drinking my tea, my Liza comes in wearing her fur coat and her
cap, with her music in her hand, already quite ready to go to the
Conservatoire. She is two-and-twenty. She looks younger, is pretty, and
rather like my wife in her young days. She kisses me tenderly on my
forehead and on my hand, and says:


“Good-morning, papa; are you quite well?”


As a child she was very fond of ice-cream, and I used often to take her to
a confectioner’s. Ice-cream was for her the type of everything delightful.
If she wanted to praise me she would say: “You are as nice as cream,
papa.” We used to call one of her little fingers “pistachio ice,” the
next, “cream ice,” the third “raspberry,” and so on. Usually when she came
in to say good-morning to me I used to sit her on my knee, kiss her little
fingers, and say:


“Creamy ice... pistachio... lemon....”


And now, from old habit, I kiss Liza’s fingers and mutter: “Pistachio...
cream... lemon...” but the effect is utterly different. I am cold as ice
and I am ashamed. When my daughter comes in to me and touches my forehead
with her lips I start as though a bee had stung me on the head, give a
forced smile, and turn my face away. Ever since I have been suffering from
sleeplessness, a question sticks in my brain like a nail. My daughter
often sees me, an old man and a distinguished man, blush painfully at
being in debt to my footman; she sees how often anxiety over petty debts
forces me to lay aside my work and to walk up and down the room for hours
together, thinking; but why is it she never comes to me in secret to
whisper in my ear: “Father, here is my watch, here are my bracelets, my
earrings, my dresses.... Pawn them all; you want money...”? How is it
that, seeing how her mother and I are placed in a false position and do
our utmost to hide our poverty from people, she does not give up her
expensive pleasure of music lessons? I would not accept her watch nor her
bracelets, nor the sacrifice of her lessons—God forbid! That isn’t
what I want.


I think at the same time of my son, the officer at Warsaw. He is a clever,
honest, and sober fellow. But that is not enough for me. I think if I had
an old father, and if I knew there were moments when he was put to shame
by his poverty, I should give up my officer’s commission to somebody else,
and should go out to earn my living as a workman. Such thoughts about my
children poison me. What is the use of them? It is only a narrow-minded or
embittered man who can harbour evil thoughts about ordinary people because
they are not heroes. But enough of that!


At a quarter to ten I have to go and give a lecture to my dear boys. I
dress and walk along the road which I have known for thirty years, and
which has its history for me. Here is the big grey house with the
chemist’s shop; at this point there used to stand a little house, and in
it was a beershop; in that beershop I thought out my thesis and wrote my
first love-letter to Varya. I wrote it in pencil, on a page headed
“Historia morbi.” Here there is a grocer’s shop; at one time it was kept
by a little Jew, who sold me cigarettes on credit; then by a fat peasant
woman, who liked the students because “every one of them has a mother”;
now there is a red-haired shopkeeper sitting in it, a very stolid man who
drinks tea from a copper teapot. And here are the gloomy gates of the
University, which have long needed doing up; I see the bored porter in his
sheep-skin, the broom, the drifts of snow.... On a boy coming fresh from
the provinces and imagining that the temple of science must really be a
temple, such gates cannot make a healthy impression. Altogether the
dilapidated condition of the University buildings, the gloominess of the
corridors, the griminess of the walls, the lack of light, the dejected
aspect of the steps, the hat-stands and the benches, take a prominent
position among predisposing causes in the history of Russian pessimism....
Here is our garden... I fancy it has grown neither better nor worse since
I was a student. I don’t like it. It would be far more sensible if there
were tall pines and fine oaks growing here instead of sickly-looking
lime-trees, yellow acacias, and skimpy pollard lilacs. The student whose
state of mind is in the majority of cases created by his surroundings,
ought in the place where he is studying to see facing him at every turn
nothing but what is lofty, strong and elegant.... God preserve him from
gaunt trees, broken windows, grey walls, and doors covered with torn
American leather!


When I go to my own entrance the door is flung wide open, and I am met by
my colleague, contemporary, and namesake, the porter Nikolay. As he lets
me in he clears his throat and says:


“A frost, your Excellency!”


Or, if my great-coat is wet:


“Rain, your Excellency!”


Then he runs on ahead of me and opens all the doors on my way. In my study
he carefully takes off my fur coat, and while doing so manages to tell me
some bit of University news. Thanks to the close intimacy existing between
all the University porters and beadles, he knows everything that goes on
in the four faculties, in the office, in the rector’s private room, in the
library. What does he not know? When in an evil day a rector or dean, for
instance, retires, I hear him in conversation with the young porters
mention the candidates for the post, explain that such a one would not be
confirmed by the minister, that another would himself refuse to accept it,
then drop into fantastic details concerning mysterious papers received in
the office, secret conversations alleged to have taken place between the
minister and the trustee, and so on. With the exception of these details,
he almost always turns out to be right. His estimates of the candidates,
though original, are very correct, too. If one wants to know in what year
some one read his thesis, entered the service, retired, or died, then
summon to your assistance the vast memory of that soldier, and he will not
only tell you the year, the month and the day, but will furnish you also
with the details that accompanied this or that event. Only one who loves
can remember like that.


He is the guardian of the University traditions. From the porters who were
his predecessors he has inherited many legends of University life, has
added to that wealth much of his own gained during his time of service,
and if you care to hear he will tell you many long and intimate stories.
He can tell one about extraordinary sages who knew everything,
about remarkable students who did not sleep for weeks, about numerous
martyrs and victims of science; with him good triumphs over evil, the weak
always vanquishes the strong, the wise man the fool, the humble the proud,
the young the old. There is no need to take all these fables and legends
for sterling coin; but filter them, and you will have left what is wanted:
our fine traditions and the names of real heroes, recognized as such by
all.


In our society the knowledge of the learned world consists of anecdotes of
the extraordinary absentmindedness of certain old professors, and two or
three witticisms variously ascribed to Gruber, to me, and to Babukin. For
the educated public that is not much. If it loved science, learned men,
and students, as Nikolay does, its literature would long ago have
contained whole epics, records of sayings and doings such as,
unfortunately, it cannot boast of now.


After telling me a piece of news, Nikolay assumes a severe expression, and
conversation about business begins. If any outsider could at such times
overhear Nikolay’s free use of our terminology, he might perhaps imagine
that he was a learned man disguised as a soldier. And, by the way, the
rumours of the erudition of the University porters are greatly
exaggerated. It is true that Nikolay knows more than a hundred Latin
words, knows how to put the skeleton together, sometimes prepares the
apparatus and amuses the students by some long, learned quotation, but the
by no means complicated theory of the circulation of the blood, for
instance, is as much a mystery to him now as it was twenty years ago.


At the table in my study, bending low over some book or preparation, sits
Pyotr Ignatyevitch, my demonstrator, a modest and industrious but by no
means clever man of five-and-thirty, already bald and corpulent; he works
from morning to night, reads a lot, remembers well everything he has read—and
in that way he is not a man, but pure gold; in all else he is a carthorse
or, in other words, a learned dullard. The carthorse characteristics that
show his lack of talent are these: his outlook is narrow and sharply
limited by his specialty; outside his special branch he is simple as a
child.


“Fancy! what a misfortune! They say Skobelev is dead.”


Nikolay crosses himself, but Pyotr Ignatyevitch turns to me and asks:


“What Skobelev is that?”


Another time—somewhat earlier—I told him that Professor Perov
was dead. Good Pyotr Ignatyevitch asked:


“What did he lecture on?”


I believe if Patti had sung in his very ear, if a horde of Chinese had
invaded Russia, if there had been an earthquake, he would not have stirred
a limb, but screwing up his eye, would have gone on calmly looking through
his microscope. What is he to Hecuba or Hecuba to him, in fact? I would
give a good deal to see how this dry stick sleeps with his wife at night.


Another characteristic is his fanatical faith in the infallibility of
science, and, above all, of everything written by the Germans. He believes
in himself, in his preparations; knows the object of life, and knows
nothing of the doubts and disappointments that turn the hair of talent
grey. He has a slavish reverence for authorities and a complete lack of
any desire for independent thought. To change his convictions is
difficult, to argue with him impossible. How is one to argue with a man
who is firmly persuaded that medicine is the finest of sciences, that
doctors are the best of men, and that the traditions of the medical
profession are superior to those of any other? Of the evil past of
medicine only one tradition has been preserved—the white tie still
worn by doctors; for a learned—in fact, for any educated man the
only traditions that can exist are those of the University as a whole,
with no distinction between medicine, law, etc. But it would be hard for
Pyotr Ignatyevitch to accept these facts, and he is ready to argue with
you till the day of judgment.


I have a clear picture in my mind of his future. In the course of his life
he will prepare many hundreds of chemicals of exceptional purity; he will
write a number of dry and very accurate memoranda, will make some dozen
conscientious translations, but he won’t do anything striking. To do that
one must have imagination, inventiveness, the gift of insight, and Pyotr
Ignatyevitch has nothing of the kind. In short, he is not a master in
science, but a journeyman.


Pyotr Ignatyevitch, Nikolay, and I, talk in subdued tones. We are not
quite ourselves. There is always a peculiar feeling when one hears through
the doors a murmur as of the sea from the lecture-theatre. In the course
of thirty years I have not grown accustomed to this feeling, and I
experience it every morning. I nervously button up my coat, ask Nikolay
unnecessary questions, lose my temper.... It is just as though I were
frightened; it is not timidity, though, but something different which I
can neither describe nor find a name for.


Quite unnecessarily, I look at my watch and say: “Well, it’s time to go
in.”


And we march into the room in the following order: foremost goes Nikolay,
with the chemicals and apparatus or with a chart; after him I come; and
then the carthorse follows humbly, with hanging head; or, when necessary,
a dead body is carried in first on a stretcher, followed by Nikolay, and
so on. On my entrance the students all stand up, then they sit down, and
the sound as of the sea is suddenly hushed. Stillness reigns.


I know what I am going to lecture about, but I don’t know how I am going
to lecture, where I am going to begin or with what I am going to end. I
haven’t a single sentence ready in my head. But I have only to look round
the lecture-hall (it is built in the form of an amphitheatre) and utter
the stereotyped phrase, “Last lecture we stopped at...” when sentences
spring up from my soul in a long string, and I am carried away by my own
eloquence. I speak with irresistible rapidity and passion, and it seems as
though there were no force which could check the flow of my words. To
lecture well—that is, with profit to the listeners and without
boring them—one must have, besides talent, experience and a special
knack; one must possess a clear conception of one’s own powers, of the
audience to which one is lecturing, and of the subject of one’s lecture.
Moreover, one must be a man who knows what he is doing; one must keep a
sharp lookout, and not for one second lose sight of what lies before one.


A good conductor, interpreting the thought of the composer, does twenty
things at once: reads the score, waves his baton, watches the singer,
makes a motion sideways, first to the drum then to the wind-instruments,
and so on. I do just the same when I lecture. Before me a hundred and
fifty faces, all unlike one another; three hundred eyes all looking
straight into my face. My object is to dominate this many-headed monster.
If every moment as I lecture I have a clear vision of the degree of its
attention and its power of comprehension, it is in my power. The other foe
I have to overcome is in myself. It is the infinite variety of forms,
phenomena, laws, and the multitude of ideas of my own and other people’s
conditioned by them. Every moment I must have the skill to snatch out of
that vast mass of material what is most important and necessary, and, as
rapidly as my words flow, clothe my thought in a form in which it can be
grasped by the monster’s intelligence, and may arouse its attention, and
at the same time one must keep a sharp lookout that one’s thoughts are
conveyed, not just as they come, but in a certain order, essential for the
correct composition of the picture I wish to sketch. Further, I endeavour
to make my diction literary, my definitions brief and precise, my wording,
as far as possible, simple and eloquent. Every minute I have to pull
myself up and remember that I have only an hour and forty minutes at my
disposal. In short, one has one’s work cut out. At one and the same minute
one has to play the part of savant and teacher and orator, and it’s a bad
thing if the orator gets the upper hand of the savant or of the teacher in
one, or vice versa.


You lecture for a quarter of an hour, for half an hour, when you notice
that the students are beginning to look at the ceiling, at Pyotr
Ignatyevitch; one is feeling for his handkerchief, another shifts in his
seat, another smiles at his thoughts.... That means that their attention
is flagging. Something must be done. Taking advantage of the first
opportunity, I make some pun. A broad grin comes on to a hundred and fifty
faces, the eyes shine brightly, the sound of the sea is audible for a
brief moment.... I laugh too. Their attention is refreshed, and I can go
on.


No kind of sport, no kind of game or diversion, has ever given me such
enjoyment as lecturing. Only at lectures have I been able to abandon
myself entirely to passion, and have understood that inspiration is not an
invention of the poets, but exists in real life, and I imagine Hercules
after the most piquant of his exploits felt just such voluptuous
exhaustion as I experience after every lecture.


That was in old times. Now at lectures I feel nothing but torture. Before
half an hour is over I am conscious of an overwhelming weakness in my legs
and my shoulders. I sit down in my chair, but I am not accustomed to
lecture sitting down; a minute later I get up and go on standing, then sit
down again. There is a dryness in my mouth, my voice grows husky, my head
begins to go round.... To conceal my condition from my audience I
continually drink water, cough, often blow my nose as though I were
hindered by a cold, make puns inappropriately, and in the end break off
earlier than I ought to. But above all I am ashamed.


My conscience and my intelligence tell me that the very best thing I could
do now would be to deliver a farewell lecture to the boys, to say my last
word to them, to bless them, and give up my post to a man younger and
stronger than me. But, God, be my judge, I have not manly courage enough
to act according to my conscience.


Unfortunately, I am not a philosopher and not a theologian. I know
perfectly well that I cannot live more than another six months; it might
be supposed that I ought now to be chiefly concerned with the question of
the shadowy life beyond the grave, and the visions that will visit my
slumbers in the tomb. But for some reason my soul refuses to recognize
these questions, though my mind is fully alive to their importance. Just
as twenty, thirty years ago, so now, on the threshold of death, I am
interested in nothing but science. As I yield up my last breath I shall
still believe that science is the most important, the most splendid, the
most essential thing in the life of man; that it always has been and will
be the highest manifestation of love, and that only by means of it will
man conquer himself and nature. This faith is perhaps naive and may rest
on false assumptions, but it is not my fault that I believe that and
nothing else; I cannot overcome in myself this belief.


But that is not the point. I only ask people to be indulgent to my
weakness, and to realize that to tear from the lecture-theatre and his
pupils a man who is more interested in the history of the development of
the bone medulla than in the final object of creation would be equivalent
to taking him and nailing him up in his coffin without waiting for him to
be dead.


Sleeplessness and the consequent strain of combating increasing weakness
leads to something strange in me. In the middle of my lecture tears
suddenly rise in my throat, my eyes begin to smart, and I feel a
passionate, hysterical desire to stretch out my hands before me and break
into loud lamentation. I want to cry out in a loud voice that I, a famous
man, have been sentenced by fate to the death penalty, that within some
six months another man will be in control here in the lecture-theatre. I
want to shriek that I am poisoned; new ideas such as I have not known
before have poisoned the last days of my life, and are still stinging my
brain like mosquitoes. And at that moment my position seems to me so awful
that I want all my listeners to be horrified, to leap up from their seats
and to rush in panic terror, with desperate screams, to the exit.


It is not easy to get through such moments.


II


After my lecture I sit at home and work. I read journals and monographs,
or prepare my next lecture; sometimes I write something. I work with
interruptions, as I have from time to time to see visitors.


There is a ring at the bell. It is a colleague come to discuss some
business matter with me. He comes in to me with his hat and his stick,
and, holding out both these objects to me, says:


“Only for a minute! Only for a minute! Sit down, collega! Only a
couple of words.”


To begin with, we both try to show each other that we are extraordinarily
polite and highly delighted to see each other. I make him sit down in an
easy-chair, and he makes me sit down; as we do so, we cautiously pat each
other on the back, touch each other’s buttons, and it looks as though we
were feeling each other and afraid of scorching our fingers. Both of us
laugh, though we say nothing amusing. When we are seated we bow our heads
towards each other and begin talking in subdued voices. However
affectionately disposed we may be to one another, we cannot help adorning
our conversation with all sorts of Chinese mannerisms, such as “As you so
justly observed,” or “I have already had the honour to inform you”; we
cannot help laughing if one of us makes a joke, however unsuccessfully.
When we have finished with business my colleague gets up impulsively and,
waving his hat in the direction of my work, begins to say good-bye. Again
we paw one another and laugh. I see him into the hall; when I assist my
colleague to put on his coat, while he does all he can to decline this
high honour. Then when Yegor opens the door my colleague declares that I
shall catch cold, while I make a show of being ready to go even into the
street with him. And when at last I go back into my study my face still
goes on smiling, I suppose from inertia.


A little later another ring at the bell. Somebody comes into the hall, and
is a long time coughing and taking off his things. Yegor announces a
student. I tell him to ask him in. A minute later a young man of agreeable
appearance comes in. For the last year he and I have been on strained
relations; he answers me disgracefully at the examinations, and I mark him
one. Every year I have some seven such hopefuls whom, to express it in the
students’ slang, I “chivy” or “floor.” Those of them who fail in their
examination through incapacity or illness usually bear their cross
patiently and do not haggle with me; those who come to the house and
haggle with me are always youths of sanguine temperament, broad natures,
whose failure at examinations spoils their appetites and hinders them from
visiting the opera with their usual regularity. I let the first class off
easily, but the second I chivy through a whole year.


“Sit down,” I say to my visitor; “what have you to tell me?”


“Excuse me, professor, for troubling you,” he begins, hesitating, and not
looking me in the face. “I would not have ventured to trouble you if it
had not been... I have been up for your examination five times, and have
been ploughed.... I beg you, be so good as to mark me for a pass,
because...”


The argument which all the sluggards bring forward on their own behalf is
always the same; they have passed well in all their subjects and have only
come to grief in mine, and that is the more surprising because they have
always been particularly interested in my subject and knew it so well;
their failure has always been entirely owing to some incomprehensible
misunderstanding.


“Excuse me, my friend,” I say to the visitor; “I cannot mark you for a
pass. Go and read up the lectures and come to me again. Then we shall
see.”


A pause. I feel an impulse to torment the student a little for liking beer
and the opera better than science, and I say, with a sigh:


“To my mind, the best thing you can do now is to give up medicine
altogether. If, with your abilities, you cannot succeed in passing the
examination, it’s evident that you have neither the desire nor the
vocation for a doctor’s calling.”


The sanguine youth’s face lengthens.


“Excuse me, professor,” he laughs, “but that would be odd of me, to say
the least of it. After studying for five years, all at once to give it
up.”


“Oh, well! Better to have lost your five years than have to spend the rest
of your life in doing work you do not care for.”


But at once I feel sorry for him, and I hasten to add:


“However, as you think best. And so read a little more and come again.”


“When?” the idle youth asks in a hollow voice.


“When you like. Tomorrow if you like.”


And in his good-natured eyes I read:


“I can come all right, but of course you will plough me again, you beast!”


“Of course,” I say, “you won’t know more science for going in for my
examination another fifteen times, but it is training your character, and
you must be thankful for that.”


Silence follows. I get up and wait for my visitor to go, but he stands and
looks towards the window, fingers his beard, and thinks. It grows boring.


The sanguine youth’s voice is pleasant and mellow, his eyes are clever and
ironical, his face is genial, though a little bloated from frequent
indulgence in beer and overlong lying on the sofa; he looks as though he
could tell me a lot of interesting things about the opera, about his
affairs of the heart, and about comrades whom he likes. Unluckily, it is
not the thing to discuss these subjects, or else I should have been glad
to listen to him.


“Professor, I give you my word of honour that if you mark me for a pass
I... I’ll...”


As soon as we reach the “word of honour” I wave my hands and sit down to
the table. The student ponders a minute longer, and says dejectedly:


“In that case, good-bye... I beg your pardon.”


“Good-bye, my friend. Good luck to you.”


He goes irresolutely into the hall, slowly puts on his outdoor things,
and, going out into the street, probably ponders for some time longer;
unable to think of anything, except “old devil,” inwardly addressed to me,
he goes into a wretched restaurant to dine and drink beer, and then home
to bed. “Peace be to thy ashes, honest toiler.”


A third ring at the bell. A young doctor, in a pair of new black trousers,
gold spectacles, and of course a white tie, walks in. He introduces
himself. I beg him to be seated, and ask what I can do for him. Not
without emotion, the young devotee of science begins telling me that he
has passed his examination as a doctor of medicine, and that he has now
only to write his dissertation. He would like to work with me under my
guidance, and he would be greatly obliged to me if I would give him a
subject for his dissertation.


“Very glad to be of use to you, colleague,” I say, “but just let us come
to an understanding as to the meaning of a dissertation. That word is
taken to mean a composition which is a product of independent creative
effort. Is that not so? A work written on another man’s subject and under
another man’s guidance is called something different....”


The doctor says nothing. I fly into a rage and jump up from my seat.


“Why is it you all come to me?” I cry angrily. “Do I keep a shop? I don’t
deal in subjects. For the thousand and oneth time I ask you all to leave
me in peace! Excuse my brutality, but I am quite sick of it!”


The doctor remains silent, but a faint flush is apparent on his
cheek-bones. His face expresses a profound reverence for my fame and my
learning, but from his eyes I can see he feels a contempt for my voice, my
pitiful figure, and my nervous gesticulation. I impress him in my anger as
a queer fish.


“I don’t keep a shop,” I go on angrily. “And it is a strange thing! Why
don’t you want to be independent? Why have you such a distaste for
independence?”


I say a great deal, but he still remains silent. By degrees I calm down,
and of course give in. The doctor gets a subject from me for his theme not
worth a halfpenny, writes under my supervision a dissertation of no use to
any one, with dignity defends it in a dreary discussion, and receives a
degree of no use to him.


The rings at the bell may follow one another endlessly, but I will confine
my description here to four of them. The bell rings for the fourth time,
and I hear familiar footsteps, the rustle of a dress, a dear voice....


Eighteen years ago a colleague of mine, an oculist, died leaving a little
daughter Katya, a child of seven, and sixty thousand roubles. In his will
he made me the child’s guardian. Till she was ten years old Katya lived
with us as one of the family, then she was sent to a boarding-school, and
only spent the summer holidays with us. I never had time to look after her
education. I only superintended it at leisure moments, and so I can say
very little about her childhood.


The first thing I remember, and like so much in remembrance, is the
extraordinary trustfulness with which she came into our house and let
herself be treated by the doctors, a trustfulness which was always shining
in her little face. She would sit somewhere out of the way, with her face
tied up, invariably watching something with attention; whether she watched
me writing or turning over the pages of a book, or watched my wife
bustling about, or the cook scrubbing a potato in the kitchen, or the dog
playing, her eyes invariably expressed the same thought—that is,
“Everything that is done in this world is nice and sensible.” She was
curious, and very fond of talking to me. Sometimes she would sit at the
table opposite me, watching my movements and asking questions. It
interested her to know what I was reading, what I did at the University,
whether I was not afraid of the dead bodies, what I did with my salary.


“Do the students fight at the University?” she would ask.


“They do, dear.”


“And do you make them go down on their knees?”


“Yes, I do.”


And she thought it funny that the students fought and I made them go down
on their knees, and she laughed. She was a gentle, patient, good child. It
happened not infrequently that I saw something taken away from her, saw
her punished without reason, or her curiosity repressed; at such times a
look of sadness was mixed with the invariable expression of trustfulness
on her face—that was all. I did not know how to take her part; only
when I saw her sad I had an inclination to draw her to me and to
commiserate her like some old nurse: “My poor little orphan one!”


I remember, too, that she was fond of fine clothes and of sprinkling
herself with scent. In that respect she was like me. I, too, am fond of
pretty clothes and nice scent.


I regret that I had not time nor inclination to watch over the rise and
development of the passion which took complete possession of Katya when
she was fourteen or fifteen. I mean her passionate love for the theatre.
When she used to come from boarding-school and stay with us for the summer
holidays, she talked of nothing with such pleasure and such warmth as of
plays and actors. She bored us with her continual talk of the theatre. My
wife and children would not listen to her. I was the only one who had not
the courage to refuse to attend to her. When she had a longing to share
her transports, she used to come into my study and say in an imploring
tone:


“Nikolay Stepanovitch, do let me talk to you about the theatre!”


I pointed to the clock, and said:


“I’ll give you half an hour—begin.”


Later on she used to bring with her dozens of portraits of actors and
actresses which she worshipped; then she attempted several times to take
part in private theatricals, and the upshot of it all was that when she
left school she came to me and announced that she was born to be an
actress.


I had never shared Katya’s inclinations for the theatre. To my mind, if a
play is good there is no need to trouble the actors in order that it may
make the right impression; it is enough to read it. If the play is poor,
no acting will make it good.


In my youth I often visited the theatre, and now my family takes a box
twice a year and carries me off for a little distraction. Of course, that
is not enough to give me the right to judge of the theatre. In my opinion
the theatre has become no better than it was thirty or forty years ago.
Just as in the past, I can never find a glass of clean water in the
corridors or foyers of the theatre. Just as in the past, the attendants
fine me twenty kopecks for my fur coat, though there is nothing
reprehensible in wearing a warm coat in winter. As in the past, for no
sort of reason, music is played in the intervals, which adds something new
and uncalled-for to the impression made by the play. As in the past, men
go in the intervals and drink spirits in the buffet. If no progress can be
seen in trifles, I should look for it in vain in what is more important.
When an actor wrapped from head to foot in stage traditions and
conventions tries to recite a simple ordinary speech, “To be or not to
be,” not simply, but invariably with the accompaniment of hissing and
convulsive movements all over his body, or when he tries to convince me at
all costs that Tchatsky, who talks so much with fools and is so fond of
folly, is a very clever man, and that “Woe from Wit” is not a dull play,
the stage gives me the same feeling of conventionality which bored me so
much forty years ago when I was regaled with the classical howling and
beating on the breast. And every time I come out of the theatre more
conservative than I go in.


The sentimental and confiding public may be persuaded that the stage, even
in its present form, is a school; but any one who is familiar with a
school in its true sense will not be caught with that bait. I cannot say
what will happen in fifty or a hundred years, but in its actual condition
the theatre can serve only as an entertainment. But this entertainment is
too costly to be frequently enjoyed. It robs the state of thousands of
healthy and talented young men and women, who, if they had not devoted
themselves to the theatre, might have been good doctors, farmers,
schoolmistresses, officers; it robs the public of the evening hours—the
best time for intellectual work and social intercourse. I say nothing of
the waste of money and the moral damage to the spectator when he sees
murder, fornication, or false witness unsuitably treated on the stage.


Katya was of an entirely different opinion. She assured me that the
theatre, even in its present condition, was superior to the lecture-hall,
to books, or to anything in the world. The stage was a power that united
in itself all the arts, and actors were missionaries. No art nor science
was capable of producing so strong and so certain an effect on the soul of
man as the stage, and it was with good reason that an actor of medium
quality enjoys greater popularity than the greatest savant or artist. And
no sort of public service could provide such enjoyment and gratification
as the theatre.


And one fine day Katya joined a troupe of actors, and went off, I believe
to Ufa, taking away with her a good supply of money, a store of rainbow
hopes, and the most aristocratic views of her work.


Her first letters on the journey were marvellous. I read them, and was
simply amazed that those small sheets of paper could contain so much
youth, purity of spirit, holy innocence, and at the same time subtle and
apt judgments which would have done credit to a fine masculine intellect.
It was more like a rapturous paean of praise she sent me than a mere
description of the Volga, the country, the towns she visited, her
companions, her failures and successes; every sentence was fragrant with
that confiding trustfulness I was accustomed to read in her face—and
at the same time there were a great many grammatical mistakes, and there
was scarcely any punctuation at all.


Before six months had passed I received a highly poetical and enthusiastic
letter beginning with the words, “I have come to love...” This letter was
accompanied by a photograph representing a young man with a shaven face, a
wide-brimmed hat, and a plaid flung over his shoulder. The letters that
followed were as splendid as before, but now commas and stops made their
appearance in them, the grammatical mistakes disappeared, and there was a
distinctly masculine flavour about them. Katya began writing to me how
splendid it would be to build a great theatre somewhere on the Volga, on a
cooperative system, and to attract to the enterprise the rich merchants
and the steamer owners; there would be a great deal of money in it; there
would be vast audiences; the actors would play on co-operative terms....
Possibly all this was really excellent, but it seemed to me that such
schemes could only originate from a man’s mind.


However that may have been, for a year and a half everything seemed to go
well: Katya was in love, believed in her work, and was happy; but then I
began to notice in her letters unmistakable signs of falling off. It began
with Katya’s complaining of her companions—this was the first and
most ominous symptom; if a young scientific or literary man begins his
career with bitter complaints of scientific and literary men, it is a sure
sign that he is worn out and not fit for his work. Katya wrote to me that
her companions did not attend the rehearsals and never knew their parts;
that one could see in every one of them an utter disrespect for the public
in the production of absurd plays, and in their behaviour on the stage;
that for the benefit of the Actors’ Fund, which they only talked about,
actresses of the serious drama demeaned themselves by singing
chansonettes, while tragic actors sang comic songs making fun of deceived
husbands and the pregnant condition of unfaithful wives, and so on. In
fact, it was amazing that all this had not yet ruined the provincial
stage, and that it could still maintain itself on such a rotten and
unsubstantial footing.


In answer I wrote Katya a long and, I must confess, a very boring letter.
Among other things, I wrote to her:


“I have more than once happened to converse with old actors, very worthy
men, who showed a friendly disposition towards me; from my conversations
with them I could understand that their work was controlled not so much by
their own intelligence and free choice as by fashion and the mood of the
public. The best of them had had to play in their day in tragedy, in
operetta, in Parisian farces, and in extravaganzas, and they always seemed
equally sure that they were on the right path and that they were of use.
So, as you see, the cause of the evil must be sought, not in the actors,
but, more deeply, in the art itself and in the attitude of the whole of
society to it.”


This letter of mine only irritated Katya. She answered me:


“You and I are singing parts out of different operas. I wrote to you, not
of the worthy men who showed a friendly disposition to you, but of a band
of knaves who have nothing worthy about them. They are a horde of savages
who have got on the stage simply because no one would have taken them
elsewhere, and who call themselves artists simply because they are
impudent. There are numbers of dull-witted creatures, drunkards,
intriguing schemers and slanderers, but there is not one person of talent
among them. I cannot tell you how bitter it is to me that the art I love
has fallen into the hands of people I detest; how bitter it is that the
best men look on at evil from afar, not caring to come closer, and,
instead of intervening, write ponderous commonplaces and utterly useless
sermons....” And so on, all in the same style.


A little time passed, and I got this letter: “I have been brutally
deceived. I cannot go on living. Dispose of my money as you think best. I
loved you as my father and my only friend. Good-bye.”


It turned out that he, too, belonged to the “horde of savages.”
Later on, from certain hints, I gathered that there had been an attempt at
suicide. I believe Katya tried to poison herself. I imagine that she must
have been seriously ill afterwards, as the next letter I got was from
Yalta, where she had most probably been sent by the doctors. Her last
letter contained a request to send her a thousand roubles to Yalta as
quickly as possible, and ended with these words:


“Excuse the gloominess of this letter; yesterday I buried my child.” After
spending about a year in the Crimea, she returned home.


She had been about four years on her travels, and during those four years,
I must confess, I had played a rather strange and unenviable part in
regard to her. When in earlier days she had told me she was going on the
stage, and then wrote to me of her love; when she was periodically
overcome by extravagance, and I continually had to send her first one and
then two thousand roubles; when she wrote to me of her intention of
suicide, and then of the death of her baby, every time I lost my head, and
all my sympathy for her sufferings found no expression except that, after
prolonged reflection, I wrote long, boring letters which I might just as
well not have written. And yet I took a father’s place with her and loved
her like a daughter!


Now Katya is living less than half a mile off. She has taken a flat of
five rooms, and has installed herself fairly comfortably and in the taste
of the day. If any one were to undertake to describe her surroundings, the
most characteristic note in the picture would be indolence. For the
indolent body there are soft lounges, soft stools; for indolent feet soft
rugs; for indolent eyes faded, dingy, or flat colours; for the indolent
soul the walls are hung with a number of cheap fans and trivial pictures,
in which the originality of the execution is more conspicuous than the
subject; and the room contains a multitude of little tables and shelves
filled with utterly useless articles of no value, and shapeless rags in
place of curtains.... All this, together with the dread of bright colours,
of symmetry, and of empty space, bears witness not only to spiritual
indolence, but also to a corruption of natural taste. For days together
Katya lies on the lounge reading, principally novels and stories. She only
goes out of the house once a day, in the afternoon, to see me.


I go on working while Katya sits silent not far from me on the sofa,
wrapping herself in her shawl, as though she were cold. Either because I
find her sympathetic or because I was used to her frequent visits when she
was a little girl, her presence does not prevent me from concentrating my
attention. From time to time I mechanically ask her some question; she
gives very brief replies; or, to rest for a minute, I turn round and watch
her as she looks dreamily at some medical journal or review. And at such
moments I notice that her face has lost the old look of confiding
trustfulness. Her expression now is cold, apathetic, and absent-minded,
like that of passengers who had to wait too long for a train. She is
dressed, as in old days, simply and beautifully, but carelessly; her dress
and her hair show visible traces of the sofas and rocking-chairs in which
she spends whole days at a stretch. And she has lost the curiosity she had
in old days. She has ceased to ask me questions now, as though she had
experienced everything in life and looked for nothing new from it.


Towards four o’clock there begins to be sounds of movement in the hall and
in the drawing-room. Liza has come back from the Conservatoire, and has
brought some girl-friends in with her. We hear them playing on the piano,
trying their voices and laughing; in the dining-room Yegor is laying the
table, with the clatter of crockery.


“Good-bye,” said Katya. “I won’t go in and see your people today. They
must excuse me. I haven’t time. Come and see me.”


While I am seeing her to the door, she looks me up and down grimly, and
says with vexation:


“You are getting thinner and thinner! Why don’t you consult a doctor? I’ll
call at Sergey Fyodorovitch’s and ask him to have a look at you.”


“There’s no need, Katya.”


“I can’t think where your people’s eyes are! They are a nice lot, I must
say!”


She puts on her fur coat abruptly, and as she does so two or three
hairpins drop unnoticed on the floor from her carelessly arranged hair.
She is too lazy and in too great a hurry to do her hair up; she carelessly
stuffs the falling curls under her hat, and goes away.


When I go into the dining-room my wife asks me:


“Was Katya with you just now? Why didn’t she come in to see us? It’s
really strange....”


“Mamma,” Liza says to her reproachfully, “let her alone, if she doesn’t
want to. We are not going down on our knees to her.”


“It’s very neglectful, anyway. To sit for three hours in the study without
remembering our existence! But of course she must do as she likes.”


Varya and Liza both hate Katya. This hatred is beyond my comprehension,
and probably one would have to be a woman in order to understand it. I am
ready to stake my life that of the hundred and fifty young men I see every
day in the lecture-theatre, and of the hundred elderly ones I meet every
week, hardly one could be found capable of understanding their hatred and
aversion for Katya’s past—that is, for her having been a mother
without being a wife, and for her having had an illegitimate child; and at
the same time I cannot recall one woman or girl of my acquaintance who
would not consciously or unconsciously harbour such feelings. And this is
not because woman is purer or more virtuous than man: why, virtue and
purity are not very different from vice if they are not free from evil
feeling. I attribute this simply to the backwardness of woman. The
mournful feeling of compassion and the pang of conscience experienced by a
modern man at the sight of suffering is, to my mind, far greater proof of
culture and moral elevation than hatred and aversion. Woman is as tearful
and as coarse in her feelings now as she was in the Middle Ages, and to my
thinking those who advise that she should be educated like a man are quite
right.


My wife also dislikes Katya for having been an actress, for ingratitude,
for pride, for eccentricity, and for the numerous vices which one woman
can always find in another.


Besides my wife and daughter and me, there are dining with us two or three
of my daughter’s friends and Alexandr Adolfovitch Gnekker, her admirer and
suitor. He is a fair-haired young man under thirty, of medium height, very
stout and broad-shouldered, with red whiskers near his ears, and little
waxed moustaches which make his plump smooth face look like a toy. He is
dressed in a very short reefer jacket, a flowered waistcoat, breeches very
full at the top and very narrow at the ankle, with a large check pattern
on them, and yellow boots without heels. He has prominent eyes like a
crab’s, his cravat is like a crab’s neck, and I even fancy there is a
smell of crab-soup about the young man’s whole person. He visits us every
day, but no one in my family knows anything of his origin nor of the place
of his education, nor of his means of livelihood. He neither plays nor
sings, but has some connection with music and singing, sells somebody’s
pianos somewhere, is frequently at the Conservatoire, is acquainted with
all the celebrities, and is a steward at the concerts; he criticizes music
with great authority, and I have noticed that people are eager to agree
with him.


Rich people always have dependents hanging about them; the arts and
sciences have the same. I believe there is not an art nor a science in the
world free from “foreign bodies” after the style of this Mr. Gnekker. I am
not a musician, and possibly I am mistaken in regard to Mr. Gnekker, of
whom, indeed, I know very little. But his air of authority and the dignity
with which he takes his stand beside the piano when any one is playing or
singing strike me as very suspicious.


You may be ever so much of a gentleman and a privy councillor, but if you
have a daughter you cannot be secure of immunity from that petty bourgeois
atmosphere which is so often brought into your house and into your mood by
the attentions of suitors, by matchmaking and marriage. I can never
reconcile myself, for instance, to the expression of triumph on my wife’s
face every time Gnekker is in our company, nor can I reconcile myself to
the bottles of Lafitte, port and sherry which are only brought out on his
account, that he may see with his own eyes the liberal and luxurious way
in which we live. I cannot tolerate the habit of spasmodic laughter Liza
has picked up at the Conservatoire, and her way of screwing up her eyes
whenever there are men in the room. Above all, I cannot understand why a
creature utterly alien to my habits, my studies, my whole manner of life,
completely different from the people I like, should come and see me every
day, and every day should dine with me. My wife and my servants
mysteriously whisper that he is a suitor, but still I don’t understand his
presence; it rouses in me the same wonder and perplexity as if they were
to set a Zulu beside me at the table. And it seems strange to me, too,
that my daughter, whom I am used to thinking of as a child, should love
that cravat, those eyes, those soft cheeks....


In the old days I used to like my dinner, or at least was indifferent
about it; now it excites in me no feeling but weariness and irritation.
Ever since I became an “Excellency” and one of the Deans of the Faculty my
family has for some reason found it necessary to make a complete change in
our menu and dining habits. Instead of the simple dishes to which I was
accustomed when I was a student and when I was in practice, now they feed
me with a puree with little white things like circles floating about in
it, and kidneys stewed in madeira. My rank as a general and my fame have
robbed me for ever of cabbage-soup and savoury pies, and goose with
apple-sauce, and bream with boiled grain. They have robbed me of our
maid-servant Agasha, a chatty and laughter-loving old woman, instead of
whom Yegor, a dull-witted and conceited fellow with a white glove on his
right hand, waits at dinner. The intervals between the courses are short,
but they seem immensely long because there is nothing to occupy them.
There is none of the gaiety of the old days, the spontaneous talk, the
jokes, the laughter; there is nothing of mutual affection and the joy
which used to animate the children, my wife, and me when in old days we
met together at meals. For me, the celebrated man of science, dinner was a
time of rest and reunion, and for my wife and children a fete—brief
indeed, but bright and joyous—in which they knew that for half an
hour I belonged, not to science, not to students, but to them alone. Our
real exhilaration from one glass of wine is gone for ever, gone is Agasha,
gone the bream with boiled grain, gone the uproar that greeted every
little startling incident at dinner, such as the cat and dog fighting
under the table, or Katya’s bandage falling off her face into her
soup-plate.


To describe our dinner nowadays is as uninteresting as to eat it. My
wife’s face wears a look of triumph and affected dignity, and her habitual
expression of anxiety. She looks at our plates and says, “I see you don’t
care for the joint. Tell me; you don’t like it, do you?” and I am obliged
to answer: “There is no need for you to trouble, my dear; the meat is very
nice.” And she will say: “You always stand up for me, Nikolay
Stepanovitch, and you never tell the truth. Why is Alexandr Adolfovitch
eating so little?” And so on in the same style all through dinner. Liza
laughs spasmodically and screws up her eyes. I watch them both, and it is
only now at dinner that it becomes absolutely evident to me that the inner
life of these two has slipped away out of my ken. I have a feeling as
though I had once lived at home with a real wife and children and that now
I am dining with visitors, in the house of a sham wife who is not the real
one, and am looking at a Liza who is not the real Liza. A startling change
has taken place in both of them; I have missed the long process by which
that change was effected, and it is no wonder that I can make nothing of
it. Why did that change take place? I don’t know. Perhaps the whole
trouble is that God has not given my wife and daughter the same strength
of character as me. From childhood I have been accustomed to resisting
external influences, and have steeled myself pretty thoroughly. Such
catastrophes in life as fame, the rank of a general, the transition from
comfort to living beyond our means, acquaintance with celebrities, etc.,
have scarcely affected me, and I have remained intact and unashamed; but
on my wife and Liza, who have not been through the same hardening process
and are weak, all this has fallen like an avalanche of snow, overwhelming
them. Gnekker and the young ladies talk of fugues, of counterpoint, of
singers and pianists, of Bach and Brahms, while my wife, afraid of their
suspecting her of ignorance of music, smiles to them sympathetically and
mutters: “That’s exquisite... really! You don’t say so!...” Gnekker eats
with solid dignity, jests with solid dignity, and condescendingly listens
to the remarks of the young ladies. From time to time he is moved to speak
in bad French, and then, for some reason or other, he thinks it necessary
to address me as “Votre Excellence.”


And I am glum. Evidently I am a constraint to them and they are a
constraint to me. I have never in my earlier days had a close knowledge of
class antagonism, but now I am tormented by something of that sort. I am
on the lookout for nothing but bad qualities in Gnekker; I quickly find
them, and am fretted at the thought that a man not of my circle is sitting
here as my daughter’s suitor. His presence has a bad influence on me in
other ways, too. As a rule, when I am alone or in the society of people I
like, never think of my own achievements, or, if I do recall them, they
seem to me as trivial as though I had only completed my studies yesterday;
but in the presence of people like Gnekker my achievements in science seem
to be a lofty mountain the top of which vanishes into the clouds, while at
its foot Gnekkers are running about scarcely visible to the naked eye.


After dinner I go into my study and there smoke my pipe, the only one in
the whole day, the sole relic of my old bad habit of smoking from morning
till night. While I am smoking my wife comes in and sits down to talk to
me. Just as in the morning, I know beforehand what our conversation is
going to be about.


“I must talk to you seriously, Nikolay Stepanovitch,” she begins. “I mean
about Liza.... Why don’t you pay attention to it?”


“To what?”


“You pretend to notice nothing. But that is not right. We can’t shirk
responsibility.... Gnekker has intentions in regard to Liza.... What do
you say?”


“That he is a bad man I can’t say, because I don’t know him, but that I
don’t like him I have told you a thousand times already.”


“But you can’t... you can’t!”


She gets up and walks about in excitement.


“You can’t take up that attitude to a serious step,” she says. “When it is
a question of our daughter’s happiness we must lay aside all personal
feeling. I know you do not like him.... Very good... if we refuse him now,
if we break it all off, how can you be sure that Liza will not have a
grievance against us all her life? Suitors are not plentiful nowadays,
goodness knows, and it may happen that no other match will turn up.... He
is very much in love with Liza, and she seems to like him.... Of course,
he has no settled position, but that can’t be helped. Please God, in time
he will get one. He is of good family and well off.”


“Where did you learn that?”


“He told us so. His father has a large house in Harkov and an estate in
the neighbourhood. In short, Nikolay Stepanovitch, you absolutely must go
to Harkov.”


“What for?”


“You will find out all about him there.... You know the professors there;
they will help you. I would go myself, but I am a woman. I cannot....”


“I am not going to Harkov,” I say morosely.


My wife is frightened, and a look of intense suffering comes into her
face.


“For God’s sake, Nikolay Stepanovitch,” she implores me, with tears in her
voice—“for God’s sake, take this burden off me! I am so worried!”


It is painful for me to look at her.


“Very well, Varya,” I say affectionately, “if you wish it, then certainly
I will go to Harkov and do all you want.”


She presses her handkerchief to her eyes and goes off to her room to cry,
and I am left alone.


A little later lights are brought in. The armchair and the lamp-shade cast
familiar shadows that have long grown wearisome on the walls and on the
floor, and when I look at them I feel as though the night had come and
with it my accursed sleeplessness. I lie on my bed, then get up and walk
about the room, then lie down again. As a rule it is after dinner, at the
approach of evening, that my nervous excitement reaches its highest pitch.
For no reason I begin crying and burying my head in the pillow. At such
times I am afraid that some one may come in; I am afraid of suddenly
dying; I am ashamed of my tears, and altogether there is something
insufferable in my soul. I feel that I can no longer bear the sight of my
lamp, of my books, of the shadows on the floor. I cannot bear the sound of
the voices coming from the drawing-room. Some force unseen,
uncomprehended, is roughly thrusting me out of my flat. I leap up
hurriedly, dress, and cautiously, that my family may not notice, slip out
into the street. Where am I to go?


The answer to that question has long been ready in my brain. To Katya.


III


As a rule she is lying on the sofa or in a lounge-chair reading. Seeing
me, she raises her head languidly, sits up, and shakes hands.


“You are always lying down,” I say, after pausing and taking breath.
“That’s not good for you. You ought to occupy yourself with something.”


“What?”


“I say you ought to occupy yourself in some way.”


“With what? A woman can be nothing but a simple workwoman or an actress.”


“Well, if you can’t be a workwoman, be an actress.”


She says nothing.


“You ought to get married,” I say, half in jest.


“There is no one to marry. There’s no reason to, either.”


“You can’t live like this.”


“Without a husband? Much that matters; I could have as many men as I like
if I wanted to.”


“That’s ugly, Katya.”


“What is ugly?”


“Why, what you have just said.”


Noticing that I am hurt and wishing to efface the disagreeable impression,
Katya says:


“Let us go; come this way.”


She takes me into a very snug little room, and says, pointing to the
writing-table:


“Look... I have got that ready for you. You shall work here. Come here
every day and bring your work with you. They only hinder you there at
home. Will you work here? Will you like to?”


Not to wound her by refusing, I answer that I will work here, and that I
like the room very much. Then we both sit down in the snug little room and
begin talking.


The warm, snug surroundings and the presence of a sympathetic person does
not, as in old days, arouse in me a feeling of pleasure, but an intense
impulse to complain and grumble. I feel for some reason that if I lament
and complain I shall feel better.


“Things are in a bad way with me, my dear—very bad....”


“What is it?”


“You see how it is, my dear; the best and holiest right of kings is the
right of mercy. And I have always felt myself a king, since I have made
unlimited use of that right. I have never judged, I have been indulgent, I
have readily forgiven every one, right and left. Where others have
protested and expressed indignation, I have only advised and persuaded.
All my life it has been my endeavour that my society should not be a
burden to my family, to my students, to my colleagues, to my servants. And
I know that this attitude to people has had a good influence on all who
have chanced to come into contact with me. But now I am not a king.
Something is happening to me that is only excusable in a slave; day and
night my brain is haunted by evil thoughts, and feelings such as I never
knew before are brooding in my soul. I am full of hatred, and contempt,
and indignation, and loathing, and dread. I have become excessively
severe, exacting, irritable, ungracious, suspicious. Even things that in
old days would have provoked me only to an unnecessary jest and a
good-natured laugh now arouse an oppressive feeling in me. My reasoning,
too, has undergone a change: in old days I despised money; now I harbour
an evil feeling, not towards money, but towards the rich as though they
were to blame: in old days I hated violence and tyranny, but now I hate
the men who make use of violence, as though they were alone to blame, and
not all of us who do not know how to educate each other. What is the
meaning of it? If these new ideas and new feelings have come from a change
of convictions, what is that change due to? Can the world have grown worse
and I better, or was I blind before and indifferent? If this change is the
result of a general decline of physical and intellectual powers—I am
ill, you know, and every day I am losing weight—my position is
pitiable; it means that my new ideas are morbid and abnormal; I ought to
be ashamed of them and think them of no consequence....”


“Illness has nothing to do with it,” Katya interrupts me; “it’s simply
that your eyes are opened, that’s all. You have seen what in old days, for
some reason, you refused to see. To my thinking, what you ought to do
first of all, is to break with your family for good, and go away.”


“You are talking nonsense.”


“You don’t love them; why should you force your feelings? Can you call
them a family? Nonentities! If they died today, no one would notice their
absence tomorrow.”


Katya despises my wife and Liza as much as they hate her. One can hardly
talk at this date of people’s having a right to despise one another. But
if one looks at it from Katya’s standpoint and recognizes such a right,
one can see she has as much right to despise my wife and Liza as they have
to hate her.


“Nonentities,” she goes on. “Have you had dinner today? How was it they
did not forget to tell you it was ready? How is it they still remember
your existence?”


“Katya,” I say sternly, “I beg you to be silent.”


“You think I enjoy talking about them? I should be glad not to know them
at all. Listen, my dear: give it all up and go away. Go abroad. The sooner
the better.”


“What nonsense! What about the University?”


“The University, too. What is it to you? There’s no sense in it, anyway.
You have been lecturing for thirty years, and where are your pupils? Are
many of them celebrated scientific men? Count them up! And to multiply the
doctors who exploit ignorance and pile up hundreds of thousands for
themselves, there is no need to be a good and talented man. You are not
wanted.”


“Good heavens! how harsh you are!” I cry in horror. “How harsh you are! Be
quiet or I will go away! I don’t know how to answer the harsh things you
say!”


The maid comes in and summons us to tea. At the samovar our conversation,
thank God, changes. After having had my grumble out, I have a longing to
give way to another weakness of old age, reminiscences. I tell Katya about
my past, and to my great astonishment tell her incidents which, till then,
I did not suspect of being still preserved in my memory, and she listens
to me with tenderness, with pride, holding her breath. I am particularly
fond of telling her how I was educated in a seminary and dreamed of going
to the University.


“At times I used to walk about our seminary garden...” I would tell her.
“If from some faraway tavern the wind floated sounds of a song and the
squeaking of an accordion, or a sledge with bells dashed by the
garden-fence, it was quite enough to send a rush of happiness, filling not
only my heart, but even my stomach, my legs, my arms.... I would listen to
the accordion or the bells dying away in the distance and imagine myself a
doctor, and paint pictures, one better than another. And here, as you see,
my dreams have come true. I have had more than I dared to dream of. For
thirty years I have been the favourite professor, I have had splendid
comrades, I have enjoyed fame and honour. I have loved, married from
passionate love, have had children. In fact, looking back upon it, I see
my whole life as a fine composition arranged with talent. Now all that is
left to me is not to spoil the end. For that I must die like a man. If
death is really a thing to dread, I must meet it as a teacher, a man of
science, and a citizen of a Christian country ought to meet it, with
courage and untroubled soul. But I am spoiling the end; I am sinking, I
fly to you, I beg for help, and you tell me ‘Sink; that is what you ought
to do.’”


But here there comes a ring at the front-door. Katya and I recognize it,
and say:


“It must be Mihail Fyodorovitch.”


And a minute later my colleague, the philologist Mihail Fyodorovitch, a
tall, well-built man of fifty, clean-shaven, with thick grey hair and
black eyebrows, walks in. He is a good-natured man and an excellent
comrade. He comes of a fortunate and talented old noble family which has
played a prominent part in the history of literature and enlightenment. He
is himself intelligent, talented, and very highly educated, but has his
oddities. To a certain extent we are all odd and all queer fish, but in
his oddities there is something exceptional, apt to cause anxiety among
his acquaintances. I know a good many people for whom his oddities
completely obscure his good qualities.


Coming in to us, he slowly takes off his gloves and says in his velvety
bass:


“Good-evening. Are you having tea? That’s just right. It’s diabolically
cold.”


Then he sits down to the table, takes a glass, and at once begins talking.
What is most characteristic in his manner of talking is the continually
jesting tone, a sort of mixture of philosophy and drollery as in
Shakespeare’s gravediggers. He is always talking about serious things, but
he never speaks seriously. His judgments are always harsh and railing,
but, thanks to his soft, even, jesting tone, the harshness and abuse do
not jar upon the ear, and one soon grows used to them. Every evening he
brings with him five or six anecdotes from the University, and he usually
begins with them when he sits down to table.


“Oh, Lord!” he sighs, twitching his black eyebrows ironically. “What comic
people there are in the world!”


“Well?” asks Katya.


“As I was coming from my lecture this morning I met that old idiot N. N——
on the stairs.... He was going along as usual, sticking out his chin like
a horse, looking for some one to listen to his grumblings at his migraine,
at his wife, and his students who won’t attend his lectures. ‘Oh,’ I
thought, ‘he has seen me—I am done for now; it is all up....’”


And so on in the same style. Or he will begin like this:


“I was yesterday at our friend Z. Z——‘s public lecture. I
wonder how it is our alma mater—don’t speak of it after dark—dare
display in public such noodles and patent dullards as that Z. Z——
Why, he is a European fool! Upon my word, you could not find another like
him all over Europe! He lectures—can you imagine?—as though he
were sucking a sugar-stick—sue, sue, sue;... he is in a nervous
funk; he can hardly decipher his own manuscript; his poor little thoughts
crawl along like a bishop on a bicycle, and, what’s worse, you can never
make out what he is trying to say. The deadly dulness is awful, the very
flies expire. It can only be compared with the boredom in the
assembly-hall at the yearly meeting when the traditional address is read—damn
it!”


And at once an abrupt transition:


“Three years ago—Nikolay Stepanovitch here will remember it—I
had to deliver that address. It was hot, stifling, my uniform cut me under
the arms—it was deadly! I read for half an hour, for an hour, for an
hour and a half, for two hours.... ‘Come,’ I thought; ‘thank God, there
are only ten pages left!’ And at the end there were four pages that there
was no need to read, and I reckoned to leave them out. ‘So there are only
six really,’ I thought; ‘that is, only six pages left to read.’ But, only
fancy, I chanced to glance before me, and, sitting in the front row, side
by side, were a general with a ribbon on his breast and a bishop. The poor
beggars were numb with boredom; they were staring with their eyes wide
open to keep awake, and yet they were trying to put on an expression of
attention and to pretend that they understood what I was saying and liked
it. ‘Well,’ I thought, ‘since you like it you shall have it! I’ll pay you
out;’ so I just gave them those four pages too.”


As is usual with ironical people, when he talks nothing in his face smiles
but his eyes and eyebrows. At such times there is no trace of hatred or
spite in his eyes, but a great deal of humour, and that peculiar fox-like
slyness which is only to be noticed in very observant people. Since I am
speaking about his eyes, I notice another peculiarity in them. When he
takes a glass from Katya, or listens to her speaking, or looks after her
as she goes out of the room for a moment, I notice in his eyes something
gentle, beseeching, pure....


The maid-servant takes away the samovar and puts on the table a large
piece of cheese, some fruit, and a bottle of Crimean champagne—a
rather poor wine of which Katya had grown fond in the Crimea. Mihail
Fyodorovitch takes two packs of cards off the whatnot and begins to play
patience. According to him, some varieties of patience require great
concentration and attention, yet while he lays out the cards he does not
leave off distracting his attention with talk. Katya watches his cards
attentively, and more by gesture than by words helps him in his play. She
drinks no more than a couple of wine-glasses of wine the whole evening; I
drink four glasses, and the rest of the bottle falls to the share of
Mihail Fyodorovitch, who can drink a great deal and never get drunk.


Over our patience we settle various questions, principally of the higher
order, and what we care for most of all—that is, science and
learning—is more roughly handled than anything.


“Science, thank God, has outlived its day,” says Mihail Fyodorovitch
emphatically. “Its song is sung. Yes, indeed. Mankind begins to feel
impelled to replace it by something different. It has grown on the soil of
superstition, been nourished by superstition, and is now just as much the
quintessence of superstition as its defunct granddames, alchemy,
metaphysics, and philosophy. And, after all, what has it given to mankind?
Why, the difference between the learned Europeans and the Chinese who have
no science is trifling, purely external. The Chinese know nothing of
science, but what have they lost thereby?”


“Flies know nothing of science, either,” I observe, “but what of that?”


“There is no need to be angry, Nikolay Stepanovitch. I only say this here
between ourselves... I am more careful than you think, and I am not going
to say this in public—God forbid! The superstition exists in the
multitude that the arts and sciences are superior to agriculture,
commerce, superior to handicrafts. Our sect is maintained by that
superstition, and it is not for you and me to destroy it. God forbid!”


After patience the younger generation comes in for a dressing too.


“Our audiences have degenerated,” sighs Mihail Fyodorovitch. “Not to speak
of ideals and all the rest of it, if only they were capable of work and
rational thought! In fact, it’s a case of ‘I look with mournful eyes on
the young men of today.’”


“Yes; they have degenerated horribly,” Katya agrees. “Tell me, have you
had one man of distinction among them for the last five or ten years?”


“I don’t know how it is with the other professors, but I can’t remember
any among mine.”


“I have seen in my day many of your students and young scientific men and
many actors—well, I have never once been so fortunate as to meet—I
won’t say a hero or a man of talent, but even an interesting man. It’s all
the same grey mediocrity, puffed up with self-conceit.”


All this talk of degeneration always affects me as though I had
accidentally overheard offensive talk about my own daughter. It offends me
that these charges are wholesale, and rest on such worn-out commonplaces,
on such wordy vapourings as degeneration and absence of ideals, or on
references to the splendours of the past. Every accusation, even if it is
uttered in ladies’ society, ought to be formulated with all possible
definiteness, or it is not an accusation, but idle disparagement, unworthy
of decent people.


I am an old man, I have been lecturing for thirty years, but I notice
neither degeneration nor lack of ideals, and I don’t find that the present
is worse than the past. My porter Nikolay, whose experience of this
subject has its value, says that the students of today are neither better
nor worse than those of the past.


If I were asked what I don’t like in my pupils of today, I should answer
the question, not straight off and not at length, but with sufficient
definiteness. I know their failings, and so have no need to resort to
vague generalities. I don’t like their smoking, using spirituous
beverages, marrying late, and often being so irresponsible and careless
that they will let one of their number be starving in their midst while
they neglect to pay their subscriptions to the Students’ Aid Society. They
don’t know modern languages, and they don’t express themselves correctly
in Russian; no longer ago than yesterday my colleague, the professor of
hygiene, complained to me that he had to give twice as many lectures,
because the students had a very poor knowledge of physics and were utterly
ignorant of meteorology. They are readily carried away by the influence of
the last new writers, even when they are not first-rate, but they take
absolutely no interest in classics such as Shakespeare, Marcus Aurelius,
Epictetus, or Pascal, and this inability to distinguish the great from the
small betrays their ignorance of practical life more than anything. All
difficult questions that have more or less a social character (for
instance the migration question) they settle by studying monographs on the
subject, but not by way of scientific investigation or experiment, though
that method is at their disposal and is more in keeping with their
calling. They gladly become ward-surgeons, assistants, demonstrators,
external teachers, and are ready to fill such posts until they are forty,
though independence, a sense of freedom and personal initiative, are no
less necessary in science than, for instance, in art or commerce. I have
pupils and listeners, but no successors and helpers, and so I love them
and am touched by them, but am not proud of them. And so on, and so on....


Such shortcomings, however numerous they may be, can only give rise to a
pessimistic or fault-finding temper in a faint-hearted and timid man. All
these failings have a casual, transitory character, and are completely
dependent on conditions of life; in some ten years they will have
disappeared or given place to other fresh defects, which are all
inevitable and will in their turn alarm the faint-hearted. The students’
sins often vex me, but that vexation is nothing in comparison with the joy
I have been experiencing now for the last thirty years when I talk to my
pupils, lecture to them, watch their relations, and compare them with
people not of their circle.


Mihail Fyodorovitch speaks evil of everything. Katya listens, and neither
of them notices into what depths the apparently innocent diversion of
finding fault with their neighbours is gradually drawing them. They are
not conscious how by degrees simple talk passes into malicious mockery and
jeering, and how they are both beginning to drop into the habits and
methods of slander.


“Killing types one meets with,” says Mihail Fyodorovitch. “I went
yesterday to our friend Yegor Petrovitch’s, and there I found a studious
gentleman, one of your medicals in his third year, I believe. Such a
face!... in the Dobrolubov style, the imprint of profound thought on his
brow; we got into talk. ‘Such doings, young man,’ said I. ‘I’ve read,’
said I, ‘that some German—I’ve forgotten his name—has created
from the human brain a new kind of alkaloid, idiotine.’ What do you think?
He believed it, and there was positively an expression of respect on his
face, as though to say, ‘See what we fellows can do!’ And the other day I
went to the theatre. I took my seat. In the next row directly in front of
me were sitting two men: one of ‘us fellows’ and apparently a law student,
the other a shaggy-looking figure, a medical student. The latter was as
drunk as a cobbler. He did not look at the stage at all. He was dozing
with his nose on his shirt-front. But as soon as an actor begins loudly
reciting a monologue, or simply raises his voice, our friend starts, pokes
his neighbour in the ribs, and asks, ‘What is he saying? Is it elevating?’
‘Yes,’ answers one of our fellows. ‘B-r-r-ravo!’ roars the medical
student. ‘Elevating! Bravo!’ He had gone to the theatre, you see, the
drunken blockhead, not for the sake of art, the play, but for elevation!
He wanted noble sentiments.”


Katya listens and laughs. She has a strange laugh; she catches her breath
in rhythmically regular gasps, very much as though she were playing the
accordion, and nothing in her face is laughing but her nostrils. I grow
depressed and don’t know what to say. Beside myself, I fire up, leap up
from my seat, and cry:


“Do leave off! Why are you sitting here like two toads, poisoning the air
with your breath? Give over!”


And without waiting for them to finish their gossip I prepare to go home.
And, indeed, it is high time: it is past ten.


“I will stay a little longer,” says Mihail Fyodorovitch. “Will you allow
me, Ekaterina Vladimirovna?”


“I will,” answers Katya.


“Bene! In that case have up another little bottle.”


They both accompany me with candles to the hall, and while I put on my fur
coat, Mihail Fyodorovitch says:


“You have grown dreadfully thin and older looking, Nikolay Stepanovitch.
What’s the matter with you? Are you ill?”


“Yes; I am not very well.”


“And you are not doing anything for it...” Katya puts in grimly.


“Why don’t you? You can’t go on like that! God helps those who help
themselves, my dear fellow. Remember me to your wife and daughter, and
make my apologies for not having been to see them. In a day or two, before
I go abroad, I shall come to say good-bye. I shall be sure to. I am going
away next week.”


I come away from Katya, irritated and alarmed by what has been said about
my being ill, and dissatisfied with myself. I ask myself whether I really
ought not to consult one of my colleagues. And at once I imagine how my
colleague, after listening to me, would walk away to the window without
speaking, would think a moment, then would turn round to me and, trying to
prevent my reading the truth in his face, would say in a careless tone:
“So far I see nothing serious, but at the same time, collega, I
advise you to lay aside your work....” And that would deprive me of my
last hope.


Who is without hope? Now that I am diagnosing my illness and prescribing
for myself, from time to time I hope that I am deceived by my own illness,
that I am mistaken in regard to the albumen and the sugar I find, and in
regard to my heart, and in regard to the swellings I have twice noticed in
the mornings; when with the fervour of the hypochondriac I look through
the textbooks of therapeutics and take a different medicine every day, I
keep fancying that I shall hit upon something comforting. All that is
petty.


Whether the sky is covered with clouds or the moon and the stars are
shining, I turn my eyes towards it every evening and think that death is
taking me soon. One would think that my thoughts at such times ought to be
deep as the sky, brilliant, striking.... But no! I think about myself,
about my wife, about Liza, Gnekker, the students, people in general; my
thoughts are evil, petty, I am insincere with myself, and at such times my
theory of life may be expressed in the words the celebrated Araktcheev
said in one of his intimate letters: “Nothing good can exist in the world
without evil, and there is more evil than good.” That is, everything is
disgusting; there is nothing to live for, and the sixty-two years I have
already lived must be reckoned as wasted. I catch myself in these
thoughts, and try to persuade myself that they are accidental, temporary,
and not deeply rooted in me, but at once I think:


“If so, what drives me every evening to those two toads?”


And I vow to myself that I will never go to Katya’s again, though I know I
shall go next evening.


Ringing the bell at the door and going upstairs, I feel that I have no
family now and no desire to bring it back again. It is clear that the new
Araktcheev thoughts are not casual, temporary visitors, but have
possession of my whole being. With my conscience ill at ease, dejected,
languid, hardly able to move my limbs, feeling as though tons were added
to my weight, I get into bed and quickly drop asleep.


And then—insomnia!


IV


Summer comes on and life is changed.


One fine morning Liza comes in to me and says in a jesting tone:


“Come, your Excellency! We are ready.”


My Excellency is conducted into the street, and seated in a cab. As I go
along, having nothing to do, I read the signboards from right to left. The
word “Traktir” reads “Ritkart”; that would just suit some baron’s family:
Baroness Ritkart. Farther on I drive through fields, by the graveyard,
which makes absolutely no impression on me, though I shall soon lie in it;
then I drive by forests and again by fields. There is nothing of interest.
After two hours of driving, my Excellency is conducted into the lower
storey of a summer villa and installed in a small, very cheerful little
room with light blue hangings.


At night there is sleeplessness as before, but in the morning I do not put
a good face upon it and listen to my wife, but lie in bed. I do not sleep,
but lie in the drowsy, half-conscious condition in which you know you are
not asleep, but dreaming. At midday I get up and from habit sit down at my
table, but I do not work now; I amuse myself with French books in yellow
covers, sent me by Katya. Of course, it would be more patriotic to read
Russian authors, but I must confess I cherish no particular liking for
them. With the exception of two or three of the older writers, all our
literature of today strikes me as not being literature, but a special sort
of home industry, which exists simply in order to be encouraged, though
people do not readily make use of its products. The very best of these
home products cannot be called remarkable and cannot be sincerely praised
without qualification. I must say the same of all the literary novelties I
have read during the last ten or fifteen years; not one of them is
remarkable, and not one of them can be praised without a “but.”
Cleverness, a good tone, but no talent; talent, a good tone, but no
cleverness; or talent, cleverness, but not a good tone.


I don’t say the French books have talent, cleverness, and a good tone.
They don’t satisfy me, either. But they are not so tedious as the Russian,
and it is not unusual to find in them the chief element of artistic
creation—the feeling of personal freedom which is lacking in the
Russian authors. I don’t remember one new book in which the author does
not try from the first page to entangle himself in all sorts of conditions
and contracts with his conscience. One is afraid to speak of the naked
body; another ties himself up hand and foot in psychological analysis; a
third must have a “warm attitude to man”; a fourth purposely scrawls whole
descriptions of nature that he may not be suspected of writing with a
purpose.... One is bent upon being middle-class in his work, another must
be a nobleman, and so on. There is intentionalness, circumspection, and
self-will, but they have neither the independence nor the manliness to
write as they like, and therefore there is no creativeness.


All this applies to what is called belles-lettres.


As for serious treatises in Russian on sociology, for instance, on art,
and so on, I do not read them simply from timidity. In my childhood and
early youth I had for some reason a terror of doorkeepers and attendants
at the theatre, and that terror has remained with me to this day. I am
afraid of them even now. It is said that we are only afraid of what we do
not understand. And, indeed, it is very difficult to understand why
doorkeepers and theatre attendants are so dignified, haughty, and
majestically rude. I feel exactly the same terror when I read serious
articles. Their extraordinary dignity, their bantering lordly tone, their
familiar manner to foreign authors, their ability to split straws with
dignity—all that is beyond my understanding; it is intimidating and
utterly unlike the quiet, gentlemanly tone to which I am accustomed when I
read the works of our medical and scientific writers. It oppresses me to
read not only the articles written by serious Russians, but even works
translated or edited by them. The pretentious, edifying tone of the
preface; the redundancy of remarks made by the translator, which prevent
me from concentrating my attention; the question marks and “sic” in
parenthesis scattered all over the book or article by the liberal
translator, are to my mind an outrage on the author and on my independence
as a reader.


Once I was summoned as an expert to a circuit court; in an interval one of
my fellow-experts drew my attention to the rudeness of the public
prosecutor to the defendants, among whom there were two ladies of good
education. I believe I did not exaggerate at all when I told him that the
prosecutor’s manner was no ruder than that of the authors of serious
articles to one another. Their manners are, indeed, so rude that I cannot
speak of them without distaste. They treat one another and the writers
they criticize either with superfluous respect, at the sacrifice of their
own dignity, or, on the contrary, with far more ruthlessness than I have
shown in my notes and my thoughts in regard to my future son-in-law
Gnekker. Accusations of irrationality, of evil intentions, and, indeed, of
every sort of crime, form an habitual ornament of serious articles. And
that, as young medical men are fond of saying in their monographs, is the
ultima ratio! Such ways must infallibly have an effect on the
morals of the younger generation of writers, and so I am not at all
surprised that in the new works with which our literature has been
enriched during the last ten or fifteen years the heroes drink too much
vodka and the heroines are not over-chaste.


I read French books, and I look out of the window which is open; I can see
the spikes of my garden-fence, two or three scraggy trees, and beyond the
fence the road, the fields, and beyond them a broad stretch of pine-wood.
Often I admire a boy and girl, both flaxen-headed and ragged, who clamber
on the fence and laugh at my baldness. In their shining little eyes I
read, “Go up, go up, thou baldhead!” They are almost the only people who
care nothing for my celebrity or my rank.


Visitors do not come to me every day now. I will only mention the visits
of Nikolay and Pyotr Ignatyevitch. Nikolay usually comes to me on
holidays, with some pretext of business, though really to see me. He
arrives very much exhilarated, a thing which never occurs to him in the
winter.


“What have you to tell me?” I ask, going out to him in the hall.


“Your Excellency!” he says, pressing his hand to his heart and looking at
me with the ecstasy of a lover—“your Excellency! God be my witness!
Strike me dead on the spot! Gaudeamus egitur juventus!”


And he greedily kisses me on the shoulder, on the sleeve, and on the
buttons.


“Is everything going well?” I ask him.


“Your Excellency! So help me God!...”


He persists in grovelling before me for no sort of reason, and soon bores
me, so I send him away to the kitchen, where they give him dinner.


Pyotr Ignatyevitch comes to see me on holidays, too, with the special
object of seeing me and sharing his thoughts with me. He usually sits down
near my table, modest, neat, and reasonable, and does not venture to cross
his legs or put his elbows on the table. All the time, in a soft, even,
little voice, in rounded bookish phrases, he tells me various, to his
mind, very interesting and piquant items of news which he has read in the
magazines and journals. They are all alike and may be reduced to this
type: “A Frenchman has made a discovery; some one else, a German, has
denounced him, proving that the discovery was made in 1870 by some
American; while a third person, also a German, trumps them both by proving
they both had made fools of themselves, mistaking bubbles of air for dark
pigment under the microscope.” Even when he wants to amuse me, Pyotr
Ignatyevitch tells me things in the same lengthy, circumstantial manner as
though he were defending a thesis, enumerating in detail the literary
sources from which he is deriving his narrative, doing his utmost to be
accurate as to the date and number of the journals and the name of every
one concerned, invariably mentioning it in full—Jean Jacques Petit,
never simply Petit. Sometimes he stays to dinner with us, and then during
the whole of dinner-time he goes on telling me the same sort of piquant
anecdotes, reducing every one at table to a state of dejected boredom. If
Gnekker and Liza begin talking before him of fugues and counterpoint,
Brahms and Bach, he drops his eyes modestly, and is overcome with
embarrassment; he is ashamed that such trivial subjects should be
discussed before such serious people as him and me.


In my present state of mind five minutes of him is enough to sicken me as
though I had been seeing and hearing him for an eternity. I hate the poor
fellow. His soft, smooth voice and bookish language exhaust me, and his
stories stupefy me.... He cherishes the best of feelings for me, and talks
to me simply in order to give me pleasure, and I repay him by looking at
him as though I wanted to hypnotize him, and think, “Go, go, go!...” But
he is not amenable to thought-suggestion, and sits on and on and on....


While he is with me I can never shake off the thought, “It’s possible when
I die he will be appointed to succeed me,” and my poor lecture-hall
presents itself to me as an oasis in which the spring is died up; and I am
ungracious, silent, and surly with Pyotr Ignatyevitch, as though he were
to blame for such thoughts, and not I myself. When he begins, as usual,
praising up the German savants, instead of making fun of him
good-humouredly, as I used to do, I mutter sullenly:


“Asses, your Germans!...”


That is like the late Professor Nikita Krylov, who once, when he was
bathing with Pirogov at Revel and vexed at the water’s being very cold,
burst out with, “Scoundrels, these Germans!” I behave badly with Pyotr
Ignatyevitch, and only when he is going away, and from the window I catch
a glimpse of his grey hat behind the garden-fence, I want to call out and
say, “Forgive me, my dear fellow!”


Dinner is even drearier than in the winter. Gnekker, whom now I hate and
despise, dines with us almost every day. I used to endure his presence in
silence, now I aim biting remarks at him which make my wife and daughter
blush. Carried away by evil feeling, I often say things that are simply
stupid, and I don’t know why I say them. So on one occasion it happened
that I stared a long time at Gnekker, and, a propos of nothing, I
fired off:


“An eagle may perchance swoop down below a cock,
But never will the fowl soar upwards to the clouds...”


And the most vexatious thing is that the fowl Gnekker shows himself much
cleverer than the eagle professor. Knowing that my wife and daughter are
on his side, he takes up the line of meeting my gibes with condescending
silence, as though to say:


“The old chap is in his dotage; what’s the use of talking to him?”


Or he makes fun of me good-naturedly. It is wonderful how petty a man may
become! I am capable of dreaming all dinner-time of how Gnekker will turn
out to be an adventurer, how my wife and Liza will come to see their
mistake, and how I will taunt them—and such absurd thoughts at the
time when I am standing with one foot in the grave!


There are now, too, misunderstandings of which in the old days I had no
idea except from hearsay. Though I am ashamed of it, I will describe one
that occurred the other day after dinner.


I was sitting in my room smoking a pipe; my wife came in as usual, sat
down, and began saying what a good thing it would be for me to go to
Harkov now while it is warm and I have free time, and there find out what
sort of person our Gnekker is.


“Very good; I will go,” I assented.


My wife, pleased with me, got up and was going to the door, but turned
back and said:


“By the way, I have another favour to ask of you. I know you will be
angry, but it is my duty to warn you.... Forgive my saying it, Nikolay
Stepanovitch, but all our neighbours and acquaintances have begun talking
about your being so often at Katya’s. She is clever and well-educated; I
don’t deny that her company may be agreeable; but at your age and with
your social position it seems strange that you should find pleasure in her
society.... Besides, she has such a reputation that...”


All the blood suddenly rushed to my brain, my eyes flashed fire, I leaped
up and, clutching at my head and stamping my feet, shouted in a voice
unlike my own:


“Let me alone! let me alone! let me alone!”


Probably my face was terrible, my voice was strange, for my wife suddenly
turned pale and began shrieking aloud in a despairing voice that was
utterly unlike her own. Liza, Gnekker, then Yegor, came running in at our
shouts....


“Let me alone!” I cried; “let me alone! Go away!”


My legs turned numb as though they had ceased to exist; I felt myself
falling into someone’s arms; for a little while I still heard weeping,
then sank into a swoon which lasted two or three hours.


Now about Katya; she comes to see me every day towards evening, and of
course neither the neighbours nor our acquaintances can avoid noticing it.
She comes in for a minute and carries me off for a drive with her. She has
her own horse and a new chaise bought this summer. Altogether she lives in
an expensive style; she has taken a big detached villa with a large
garden, and has taken all her town retinue with her—two maids, a
coachman... I often ask her:


“Katya, what will you live on when you have spent your father’s money?”


“Then we shall see,” she answers.


“That money, my dear, deserves to be treated more seriously. It was earned
by a good man, by honest labour.”


“You have told me that already. I know it.”


At first we drive through the open country, then through the pine-wood
which is visible from my window. Nature seems to me as beautiful as it
always has been, though some evil spirit whispers to me that these pines
and fir trees, birds, and white clouds on the sky, will not notice my
absence when in three or four months I am dead. Katya loves driving, and
she is pleased that it is fine weather and that I am sitting beside her.
She is in good spirits and does not say harsh things.


“You are a very good man, Nikolay Stepanovitch,” she says. “You are a rare
specimen, and there isn’t an actor who would understand how to play you.
Me or Mihail Fyodorovitch, for instance, any poor actor could do, but not
you. And I envy you, I envy you horribly! Do you know what I stand for?
What?”


She ponders for a minute, and then asks me:


“Nikolay Stepanovitch, I am a negative phenomenon! Yes?”


“Yes,” I answer.


“H’m! what am I to do?”


What answer was I to make her? It is easy to say “work,” or “give your
possessions to the poor,” or “know yourself,” and because it is so easy to
say that, I don’t know what to answer.


My colleagues when they teach therapeutics advise “the individual study of
each separate case.” One has but to obey this advice to gain the
conviction that the methods recommended in the textbooks as the best and
as providing a safe basis for treatment turn out to be quite unsuitable in
individual cases. It is just the same in moral ailments.


But I must make some answer, and I say:


“You have too much free time, my dear; you absolutely must take up some
occupation. After all, why shouldn’t you be an actress again if it is your
vocation?”


“I cannot!”


“Your tone and manner suggest that you are a victim. I don’t like that, my
dear; it is your own fault. Remember, you began with falling out with
people and methods, but you have done nothing to make either better. You
did not struggle with evil, but were cast down by it, and you are not the
victim of the struggle, but of your own impotence. Well, of course you
were young and inexperienced then; now it may all be different. Yes,
really, go on the stage. You will work, you will serve a sacred art.”


“Don’t pretend, Nikolay Stepanovitch,” Katya interrupts me. “Let us make a
compact once for all; we will talk about actors, actresses, and authors,
but we will let art alone. You are a splendid and rare person, but you
don’t know enough about art sincerely to think it sacred. You have no
instinct or feeling for art. You have been hard at work all your life, and
have not had time to acquire that feeling. Altogether... I don’t like talk
about art,” she goes on nervously. “I don’t like it! And, my goodness, how
they have vulgarized it!”


“Who has vulgarized it?”


“They have vulgarized it by drunkenness, the newspapers by their familiar
attitude, clever people by philosophy.”


“Philosophy has nothing to do with it.”


“Yes, it has. If any one philosophizes about it, it shows he does not
understand it.”


To avoid bitterness I hasten to change the subject, and then sit a long
time silent. Only when we are driving out of the wood and turning towards
Katya’s villa I go back to my former question, and say:


“You have still not answered me, why you don’t want to go on the stage.”


“Nikolay Stepanovitch, this is cruel!” she cries, and suddenly flushes all
over. “You want me to tell you the truth aloud? Very well, if... if you
like it! I have no talent! No talent and... and a great deal of vanity! So
there!”


After making this confession she turns her face away from me, and to hide
the trembling of her hands tugs violently at the reins.


As we are driving towards her villa we see Mihail Fyodorovitch walking
near the gate, impatiently awaiting us.


“That Mihail Fyodorovitch again!” says Katya with vexation. “Do rid me of
him, please! I am sick and tired of him... bother him!”


Mihail Fyodorovitch ought to have gone abroad long ago, but he puts off
going from week to week. Of late there have been certain changes in him.
He looks, as it were, sunken, has taken to drinking until he is tipsy, a
thing which never used to happen to him, and his black eyebrows are
beginning to turn grey. When our chaise stops at the gate he does not
conceal his joy and his impatience. He fussily helps me and Katya out,
hurriedly asks questions, laughs, rubs his hands, and that gentle,
imploring, pure expression, which I used to notice only in his eyes, is
now suffused all over his face. He is glad and at the same time he is
ashamed of his gladness, ashamed of his habit of spending every evening
with Katya. And he thinks it necessary to explain his visit by some
obvious absurdity such as: “I was driving by, and I thought I would just
look in for a minute.”


We all three go indoors; first we drink tea, then the familiar packs of
cards, the big piece of cheese, the fruit, and the bottle of Crimean
champagne are put upon the table. The subjects of our conversation are not
new; they are just the same as in the winter. We fall foul of the
University, the students, and literature and the theatre; the air grows
thick and stifling with evil speaking, and poisoned by the breath, not of
two toads as in the winter, but of three. Besides the velvety baritone
laugh and the giggle like the gasp of a concertina, the maid who waits
upon us hears an unpleasant cracked “He, he!” like the chuckle of a
general in a vaudeville.


V


There are terrible nights with thunder, lightning, rain, and wind, such as
are called among the people “sparrow nights.” There has been one such
night in my personal life.


I woke up after midnight and leaped suddenly out of bed. It seemed to me
for some reason that I was just immediately going to die. Why did it seem
so? I had no sensation in my body that suggested my immediate death, but
my soul was oppressed with terror, as though I had suddenly seen a vast
menacing glow of fire.


I rapidly struck a light, drank some water straight out of the decanter,
then hurried to the open window. The weather outside was magnificent.
There was a smell of hay and some other very sweet scent. I could see the
spikes of the fence, the gaunt, drowsy trees by the window, the road, the
dark streak of woodland, there was a serene, very bright moon in the sky
and not a single cloud, perfect stillness, not one leaf stirring. I felt
that everything was looking at me and waiting for me to die....


It was uncanny. I closed the window and ran to my bed. I felt for my
pulse, and not finding it in my wrist, tried to find it in my temple, then
in my chin, and again in my wrist, and everything I touched was cold and
clammy with sweat. My breathing came more and more rapidly, my body was
shivering, all my inside was in commotion; I had a sensation on my face
and on my bald head as though they were covered with spiders’ webs.


What should I do? Call my family? No; it would be no use. I could not
imagine what my wife and Liza would do when they came in to me.


I hid my head under the pillow, closed my eyes, and waited and waited....
My spine was cold; it seemed to be drawn inwards, and I felt as though
death were coming upon me stealthily from behind.


“Kee-vee! kee-vee!” I heard a sudden shriek in the night’s stillness, and
did not know where it was—in my breast or in the street—“Kee-vee!
kee-vee!”


“My God, how terrible!” I would have drunk some more water, but by then it
was fearful to open my eyes and I was afraid to raise my head. I was
possessed by unaccountable animal terror, and I cannot understand why I
was so frightened: was it that I wanted to live, or that some new unknown
pain was in store for me?


Upstairs, overhead, some one moaned or laughed. I listened. Soon
afterwards there was a sound of footsteps on the stairs. Some one came
hurriedly down, then went up again. A minute later there was a sound of
steps downstairs again; some one stopped near my door and listened.


“Who is there?” I cried.


The door opened. I boldly opened my eyes, and saw my wife. Her face was
pale and her eyes were tear-stained.


“You are not asleep, Nikolay Stepanovitch?” she asked.


“What is it?”


“For God’s sake, go up and have a look at Liza; there is something the
matter with her....”


“Very good, with pleasure,” I muttered, greatly relieved at not being
alone. “Very good, this minute....”


I followed my wife, heard what she said to me, and was too agitated to
understand a word. Patches of light from her candle danced about the
stairs, our long shadows trembled. My feet caught in the skirts of my
dressing-gown; I gasped for breath, and felt as though something were
pursuing me and trying to catch me from behind.


“I shall die on the spot, here on the staircase,” I thought. “On the
spot....” But we passed the staircase, the dark corridor with the Italian
windows, and went into Liza’s room. She was sitting on the bed in her
nightdress, with her bare feet hanging down, and she was moaning.


“Oh, my God! Oh, my God!” she was muttering, screwing up her eyes at our
candle. “I can’t bear it.”


“Liza, my child,” I said, “what is it?”


Seeing me, she began crying out, and flung herself on my neck.


“My kind papa!...” she sobbed—“my dear, good papa... my darling, my
pet, I don’t know what is the matter with me.... I am miserable!”


She hugged me, kissed me, and babbled fond words I used to hear from her
when she was a child.


“Calm yourself, my child. God be with you,” I said. “There is no need to
cry. I am miserable, too.”


I tried to tuck her in; my wife gave her water, and we awkwardly stumbled
by her bedside; my shoulder jostled against her shoulder, and meanwhile I
was thinking how we used to give our children their bath together.


“Help her! help her!” my wife implored me. “Do something!”


What could I do? I could do nothing. There was some load on the girl’s
heart; but I did not understand, I knew nothing about it, and could only
mutter:


“It’s nothing, it’s nothing; it will pass. Sleep, sleep!”


To make things worse, there was a sudden sound of dogs howling, at first
subdued and uncertain, then loud, two dogs howling together. I had never
attached significance to such omens as the howling of dogs or the
shrieking of owls, but on that occasion it sent a pang to my heart, and I
hastened to explain the howl to myself.


“It’s nonsense,” I thought, “the influence of one organism on another. The
intensely strained condition of my nerves has infected my wife, Liza, the
dog—that is all.... Such infection explains presentiments,
forebodings....”


When a little later I went back to my room to write a prescription for
Liza, I no longer thought I should die at once, but only had such a
weight, such a feeling of oppression in my soul that I felt actually sorry
that I had not died on the spot. For a long time I stood motionless in the
middle of the room, pondering what to prescribe for Liza. But the moans
overhead ceased, and I decided to prescribe nothing, and yet I went on
standing there....


There was a deathlike stillness, such a stillness, as some author has
expressed it, “it rang in one’s ears.” Time passed slowly; the streaks of
moonlight on the window-sill did not shift their position, but seemed as
though frozen.... It was still some time before dawn.


But the gate in the fence creaked, some one stole in and, breaking a twig
from one of those scraggy trees, cautiously tapped on the window with it.


“Nikolay Stepanovitch,” I heard a whisper. “Nikolay Stepanovitch.”


I opened the window, and fancied I was dreaming: under the window, huddled
against the wall, stood a woman in a black dress, with the moonlight
bright upon her, looking at me with great eyes. Her face was pale, stern,
and weird-looking in the moonlight, like marble, her chin was quivering.


“It is I,” she said—“I... Katya.”


In the moonlight all women’s eyes look big and black, all people look
taller and paler, and that was probably why I had not recognized her for
the first minute.


“What is it?”


“Forgive me!” she said. “I suddenly felt unbearably miserable... I
couldn’t stand it, so came here. There was a light in your window and...
and I ventured to knock.... I beg your pardon. Ah! if you knew how
miserable I am! What are you doing just now?”


“Nothing.... I can’t sleep.”


“I had a feeling that there was something wrong, but that is nonsense.”


Her brows were lifted, her eyes shone with tears, and her whole face was
lighted up with the familiar look of trustfulness which I had not seen for
so long.


“Nikolay Stepanovitch,” she said imploringly, stretching out both hands to
me, “my precious friend, I beg you, I implore you.... If you don’t despise
my affection and respect for you, consent to what I ask of you.”


“What is it?”


“Take my money from me!”


“Come! what an idea! What do I want with your money?”


“You’ll go away somewhere for your health.... You ought to go for your
health. Will you take it? Yes? Nikolay Stepanovitch darling, yes?”


She looked greedily into my face and repeated: “Yes, you will take it?”


“No, my dear, I won’t take it,” I said. “Thank you.”


She turned her back upon me and bowed her head. Probably I refused her in
a tone which made further conversation about money impossible.


“Go home to bed,” I said. “We will see each other tomorrow.”


“So you don’t consider me your friend?” she asked dejectedly.


“I don’t say that. But your money would be no use to me now.”


“I beg your pardon...” she said, dropping her voice a whole octave. “I
understand you... to be indebted to a person like me... a retired
actress.... But, good-bye....”


And she went away so quickly that I had not time even to say good-bye.


VI


I am in Harkov.


As it would be useless to contend against my present mood and, indeed,
beyond my power, I have made up my mind that the last days of my life
shall at least be irreproachable externally. If I am unjust in regard to
my wife and daughter, which I fully recognize, I will try and do as she
wishes; since she wants me to go to Harkov, I go to Harkov. Besides, I
have become of late so indifferent to everything that it is really all the
same to me where I go, to Harkov, or to Paris, or to Berditchev.


I arrived here at midday, and have put up at the hotel not far from the
cathedral. The train was jolting, there were draughts, and now I am
sitting on my bed, holding my head and expecting tic douloureux. I ought
to have gone today to see some professors of my acquaintance, but I have
neither strength nor inclination.


The old corridor attendant comes in and asks whether I have brought my
bed-linen. I detain him for five minutes, and put several questions to him
about Gnekker, on whose account I have come here. The attendant turns out
to be a native of Harkov; he knows the town like the fingers of his hand,
but does not remember any household of the surname of Gnekker. I question
him about the estate—the same answer.


The clock in the corridor strikes one, then two, then three.... These last
months in which I am waiting for death seem much longer than the whole of
my life. And I have never before been so ready to resign myself to the
slowness of time as now. In the old days, when one sat in the station and
waited for a train, or presided in an examination-room, a quarter of an
hour would seem an eternity. Now I can sit all night on my bed without
moving, and quite unconcernedly reflect that tomorrow will be followed by
another night as long and colourless, and the day after tomorrow.


In the corridor it strikes five, six, seven.... It grows dark.


There is a dull pain in my cheek, the tic beginning. To occupy myself with
thoughts, I go back to my old point of view, when I was not so
indifferent, and ask myself why I, a distinguished man, a privy
councillor, am sitting in this little hotel room, on this bed with the
unfamiliar grey quilt. Why am I looking at that cheap tin washing-stand
and listening to the whirr of the wretched clock in the corridor? Is all
this in keeping with my fame and my lofty position? And I answer these
questions with a jeer. I am amused by the naivete with which I used in my
youth to exaggerate the value of renown and of the exceptional position
which celebrities are supposed to enjoy. I am famous, my name is
pronounced with reverence, my portrait has been both in the Niva
and in the Illustrated News of the World; I have read my biography
even in a German magazine. And what of all that? Here I am sitting utterly
alone in a strange town, on a strange bed, rubbing my aching cheek with my
hand.... Domestic worries, the hard-heartedness of creditors, the rudeness
of the railway servants, the inconveniences of the passport system, the
expensive and unwholesome food in the refreshment-rooms, the general
rudeness and coarseness in social intercourse—all this, and a great
deal more which would take too long to reckon up, affects me as much as
any working man who is famous only in his alley. In what way, does my
exceptional position find expression? Admitting that I am celebrated a
thousand times over, that I am a hero of whom my country is proud. They
publish bulletins of my illness in every paper, letters of sympathy come
to me by post from my colleagues, my pupils, the general public; but all
that does not prevent me from dying in a strange bed, in misery, in utter
loneliness. Of course, no one is to blame for that; but I in my
foolishness dislike my popularity. I feel as though it had cheated me.


At ten o’clock I fall asleep, and in spite of the tic I sleep soundly, and
should have gone on sleeping if I had not been awakened. Soon after one
came a sudden knock at the door.


“Who is there?”


“A telegram.”


“You might have waited till tomorrow,” I say angrily, taking the telegram
from the attendant. “Now I shall not get to sleep again.”


“I am sorry. Your light was burning, so I thought you were not asleep.”


I tear open the telegram and look first at the signature. From my wife.


“What does she want?”


“Gnekker was secretly married to Liza yesterday. Return.”


I read the telegram, and my dismay does not last long. I am dismayed, not
by what Liza and Gnekker have done, but by the indifference with which I
hear of their marriage. They say philosophers and the truly wise are
indifferent. It is false: indifference is the paralysis of the soul; it is
premature death.


I go to bed again, and begin trying to think of something to occupy my
mind. What am I to think about? I feel as though everything had been
thought over already and there is nothing which could hold my attention
now.


When daylight comes I sit up in bed with my arms round my knees, and to
pass the time I try to know myself. “Know thyself” is excellent and useful
advice; it is only a pity that the ancients never thought to indicate the
means of following this precept.


When I have wanted to understand somebody or myself I have considered, not
the actions, in which everything is relative, but the desires.


“Tell me what you want, and I will tell you what manner of man you are.”


And now I examine myself: what do I want?


I want our wives, our children, our friends, our pupils, to love in us,
not our fame, not the brand and not the label, but to love us as ordinary
men. Anything else? I should like to have had helpers and successors.
Anything else? I should like to wake up in a hundred years’ time and to
have just a peep out of one eye at what is happening in science. I should
have liked to have lived another ten years... What further? Why, nothing
further. I think and think, and can think of nothing more. And however
much I might think, and however far my thoughts might travel, it is clear
to me that there is nothing vital, nothing of great importance in my
desires. In my passion for science, in my desire to live, in this sitting
on a strange bed, and in this striving to know myself—in all the
thoughts, feelings, and ideas I form about everything, there is no common
bond to connect it all into one whole. Every feeling and every thought
exists apart in me; and in all my criticisms of science, the theatre,
literature, my pupils, and in all the pictures my imagination draws, even
the most skilful analyst could not find what is called a general idea, or
the god of a living man.


And if there is not that, then there is nothing.


In a state so poverty-stricken, a serious ailment, the fear of death, the
influences of circumstance and men were enough to turn upside down and
scatter in fragments all which I had once looked upon as my theory of
life, and in which I had seen the meaning and joy of my existence. So
there is nothing surprising in the fact that I have over-shadowed the last
months of my life with thoughts and feelings only worthy of a slave and
barbarian, and that now I am indifferent and take no heed of the dawn.
When a man has not in him what is loftier and mightier than all external
impressions a bad cold is really enough to upset his equilibrium and make
him begin to see an owl in every bird, to hear a dog howling in every
sound. And all his pessimism or optimism with his thoughts great and small
have at such times significance as symptoms and nothing more.


I am vanquished. If it is so, it is useless to think, it is useless to
talk. I will sit and wait in silence for what is to come.


In the morning the corridor attendant brings me tea and a copy of the
local newspaper. Mechanically I read the advertisements on the first page,
the leading article, the extracts from the newspapers and journals, the
chronicle of events.... In the latter I find, among other things, the
following paragraph: “Our distinguished savant, Professor Nikolay
Stepanovitch So-and-so, arrived yesterday in Harkov, and is staying in the
So-and-so Hotel.”


Apparently, illustrious names are created to live on their own account,
apart from those that bear them. Now my name is promenading tranquilly
about Harkov; in another three months, printed in gold letters on my
monument, it will shine bright as the sun itself, while I shall be
already under the moss.


A light tap at the door. Somebody wants me.


“Who is there? Come in.”


The door opens, and I step back surprised and hurriedly wrap my
dressing-gown round me. Before me stands Katya.


“How do you do?” she says, breathless with running upstairs. “You didn’t
expect me? I have come here, too.... I have come, too!”


She sits down and goes on, hesitating and not looking at me.


“Why don’t you speak to me? I have come, too... today.... I found out that
you were in this hotel, and have come to you.”


“Very glad to see you,” I say, shrugging my shoulders, “but I am
surprised. You seem to have dropped from the skies. What have you come
for?”


“Oh... I’ve simply come.”


Silence. Suddenly she jumps up impulsively and comes to me.


“Nikolay Stepanovitch,” she says, turning pale and pressing her hands on
her bosom—“Nikolay Stepanovitch, I cannot go on living like this! I
cannot! For God’s sake tell me quickly, this minute, what I am to do! Tell
me, what am I to do?”


“What can I tell you?” I ask in perplexity. “I can do nothing.”


“Tell me, I beseech you,” she goes on, breathing hard and trembling all
over. “I swear that I cannot go on living like this. It’s too much for
me!”


She sinks on a chair and begins sobbing. She flings her head back, wrings
her hands, taps with her feet; her hat falls off and hangs bobbing on its
elastic; her hair is ruffled.


“Help me! help me!” she implores me. “I cannot go on!”


She takes her handkerchief out of her travelling-bag, and with it pulls
out several letters, which fall from her lap to the floor. I pick them up,
and on one of them I recognize the handwriting of Mihail Fyodorovitch and
accidentally read a bit of a word “passionat...”


“There is nothing I can tell you, Katya,” I say.


“Help me!” she sobs, clutching at my hand and kissing it. “You are my
father, you know, my only friend! You are clever, educated; you have lived
so long; you have been a teacher! Tell me, what am I to do?”


“Upon my word, Katya, I don’t know....”


I am utterly at a loss and confused, touched by her sobs, and hardly able
to stand.


“Let us have lunch, Katya,” I say, with a forced smile. “Give over
crying.”


And at once I add in a sinking voice:


“I shall soon be gone, Katya....”


“Only one word, only one word!” she weeps, stretching out her hands to me.


“What am I to do?”


“You are a queer girl, really...” I mutter. “I don’t understand it! So
sensible, and all at once crying your eyes out....”


A silence follows. Katya straightens her hair, puts on her hat, then
crumples up the letters and stuffs them in her bag—and all this
deliberately, in silence. Her face, her bosom, and her gloves are wet with
tears, but her expression now is cold and forbidding.... I look at her,
and feel ashamed that I am happier than she. The absence of what my
philosophic colleagues call a general idea I have detected in myself only
just before death, in the decline of my days, while the soul of this poor
girl has known and will know no refuge all her life, all her life!


“Let us have lunch, Katya,” I say.


“No, thank you,” she answers coldly. Another minute passes in silence. “I
don’t like Harkov,” I say; “it’s so grey here—such a grey town.”


“Yes, perhaps.... It’s ugly. I am here not for long, passing through. I am
going on today.”


“Where?”


“To the Crimea... that is, to the Caucasus.”


“Oh! For long?”


“I don’t know.”


Katya gets up, and, with a cold smile, holds out her hand without looking
at me.


I want to ask her, “Then, you won’t be at my funeral?” but she does not
look at me; her hand is cold and, as it were, strange. I escort her to the
door in silence. She goes out, walks down the long corridor without
looking back; she knows that I am looking after her, and most likely she
will look back at the turn.


No, she did not look back. I’ve seen her black dress for the last time:
her steps have died away. Farewell, my treasure!








THE PRIVY COUNCILLOR

AT the beginning of April in 1870 my mother, Klavdia Arhipovna, the widow
of a lieutenant, received from her brother Ivan, a privy councillor in
Petersburg, a letter in which, among other things, this passage occurred:
“My liver trouble forces me to spend every summer abroad, and as I have
not at the moment the money in hand for a trip to Marienbad, it is very
possible, dear sister, that I may spend this summer with you at
Kotchuevko....”


On reading the letter my mother turned pale and began trembling all over;
then an expression of mingled tears and laughter came into her face. She
began crying and laughing. This conflict of tears and laughter always
reminds me of the flickering and spluttering of a brightly burning candle
when one sprinkles it with water. Reading the letter once more, mother
called together all the household, and in a voice broken with emotion
began explaining to us that there had been four Gundasov brothers: one
Gundasov had died as a baby; another had gone to the war, and he, too, was
dead; the third, without offence to him be it said, was an actor; the
fourth...


“The fourth has risen far above us,” my mother brought out tearfully. “My
own brother, we grew up together; and I am all of a tremble, all of a
tremble!... A privy councillor with the rank of a general! How shall I
meet him, my angel brother? What can I, a foolish, uneducated woman, talk
to him about? It’s fifteen years since I’ve seen him! Andryushenka,” my
mother turned to me, “you must rejoice, little stupid! It’s a piece of
luck for you that God is sending him to us!”


After we had heard a detailed history of the Gundasovs, there followed a
fuss and bustle in the place such as I had been accustomed to see only
before Christmas and Easter. The sky above and the water in the river were
all that escaped; everything else was subjected to a merciless cleansing,
scrubbing, painting. If the sky had been lower and smaller and the river
had not flowed so swiftly, they would have scoured them, too, with
bath-brick and rubbed them, too, with tow. Our walls were as white as
snow, but they were whitewashed; the floors were bright and shining, but
they were washed every day. The cat Bobtail (as a small child I had cut
off a good quarter of his tail with the knife used for chopping the sugar,
and that was why he was called Bobtail) was carried off to the kitchen and
put in charge of Anisya; Fedka was told that if any of the dogs came near
the front-door “God would punish him.” But no one was so badly treated as
the poor sofas, easy-chairs, and rugs! They had never, before been so
violently beaten as on this occasion in preparation for our visitor. My
pigeons took fright at the loud thud of the sticks, and were continually
flying up into the sky.


The tailor Spiridon, the only tailor in the whole district who ventured to
make for the gentry, came over from Novostroevka. He was a hard-working
capable man who did not drink and was not without a certain fancy and
feeling for form, but yet he was an atrocious tailor. His work was ruined
by hesitation.... The idea that his cut was not fashionable enough made
him alter everything half a dozen times, walk all the way to the town
simply to study the dandies, and in the end dress us in suits that even a
caricaturist would have called outre and grotesque. We cut a dash
in impossibly narrow trousers and in such short jackets that we always
felt quite abashed in the presence of young ladies.


This Spiridon spent a long time taking my measure. He measured me all over
lengthways and crossways, as though he meant to put hoops round me like a
barrel; then he spent a long time noting down my measurements with a thick
pencil on a bit of paper, and ticked off all the measurements with
triangular signs. When he had finished with me he set to work on my tutor,
Yegor Alexyevitch Pobyedimsky. My beloved tutor was then at the stage when
young men watch the growth of their moustache and are critical of their
clothes, and so you can imagine the devout awe with which Spiridon
approached him. Yegor Alexyevitch had to throw back his head, to straddle
his legs like an inverted V, first lift up his arms, then let them fall.
Spiridon measured him several times, walking round him during the process
like a love-sick pigeon round its mate, going down on one knee, bending
double.... My mother, weary, exhausted by her exertions and heated by
ironing, watched these lengthy proceedings, and said:


“Mind now, Spiridon, you will have to answer for it to God if you spoil
the cloth! And it will be the worse for you if you don’t make them fit!”


Mother’s words threw Spiridon first into a fever, then into a
perspiration, for he was convinced that he would not make them fit. He
received one rouble twenty kopecks for making my suit, and for
Pobyedimsky’s two roubles, but we provided the cloth, the lining, and the
buttons. The price cannot be considered excessive, as Novostroevka was
about seven miles from us, and the tailor came to fit us four times. When
he came to try the things on and we squeezed ourselves into the tight
trousers and jackets adorned with basting threads, mother always frowned
contemptuously and expressed her surprise:


“Goodness knows what the fashions are coming to nowadays! I am positively
ashamed to look at them. If brother were not used to Petersburg I would
not get you fashionable clothes!”


Spiridon, relieved that the blame was thrown on the fashion and not on
him, shrugged his shoulders and sighed, as though to say:


“There’s no help for it; it’s the spirit of the age!”


The excitement with which we awaited the arrival of our guest can only be
compared with the strained suspense with which spiritualists wait from
minute to minute the appearance of a ghost. Mother went about with a sick
headache, and was continually melting into tears. I lost my appetite,
slept badly, and did not learn my lessons. Even in my dreams I was haunted
by an impatient longing to see a general—that is, a man with
epaulettes and an embroidered collar sticking up to his ears, and with a
naked sword in his hands, exactly like the one who hung over the sofa in
the drawing-room and glared with terrible black eyes at everybody who
dared to look at him. Pobyedimsky was the only one who felt himself in his
element. He was neither terrified nor delighted, and merely from time to
time, when he heard the history of the Gundasov family, said:


“Yes, it will be pleasant to have some one fresh to talk to.”


My tutor was looked upon among us as an exceptional nature. He was a young
man of twenty, with a pimply face, shaggy locks, a low forehead, and an
unusually long nose. His nose was so big that when he wanted to look close
at anything he had to put his head on one side like a bird. To our
thinking, there was not a man in the province cleverer, more cultivated,
or more stylish. He had left the high-school in the class next to the top,
and had then entered a veterinary college, from which he was expelled
before the end of the first half-year. The reason of his expulsion he
carefully concealed, which enabled any one who wished to do so to look
upon my instructor as an injured and to some extent a mysterious person.
He spoke little, and only of intellectual subjects; he ate meat during the
fasts, and looked with contempt and condescension on the life going on
around him, which did not prevent him, however, from taking presents, such
as suits of clothes, from my mother, and drawing funny faces with red
teeth on my kites. Mother disliked him for his “pride,” but stood in awe
of his cleverness.


Our visitor did not keep us long waiting. At the beginning of May two
wagon-loads of big boxes arrived from the station. These boxes looked so
majestic that the drivers instinctively took off their hats as they lifted
them down.


“There must be uniforms and gunpowder in those boxes,” I thought.


Why “gunpowder”? Probably the conception of a general was closely
connected in my mind with cannons and gunpowder.


When I woke up on the morning of the tenth of May, nurse told me in a
whisper that “my uncle had come.” I dressed rapidly, and, washing after a
fashion, flew out of my bedroom without saying my prayers. In the
vestibule I came upon a tall, solid gentleman with fashionable whiskers
and a foppish-looking overcoat. Half dead with devout awe, I went up to
him and, remembering the ceremonial mother had impressed upon me, I
scraped my foot before him, made a very low bow, and craned forward to
kiss his hand; but the gentleman did not allow me to kiss his hand: he
informed me that he was not my uncle, but my uncle’s footman, Pyotr. The
appearance of this Pyotr, far better dressed than Pobyedimsky or me,
excited in me the utmost astonishment, which, to tell the truth, has
lasted to this day. Can such dignified, respectable people with stern and
intellectual faces really be footmen? And what for?


Pyotr told me that my uncle was in the garden with my mother. I rushed
into the garden.


Nature, knowing nothing of the history of the Gundasov family and the rank
of my uncle, felt far more at ease and unconstrained than I. There was a
clamour going on in the garden such as one only hears at fairs. Masses of
starlings flitting through the air and hopping about the walks were
noisily chattering as they hunted for cockchafers. There were swarms of
sparrows in the lilac-bushes, which threw their tender, fragrant blossoms
straight in one’s face. Wherever one turned, from every direction came the
note of the golden oriole and the shrill cry of the hoopoe and the
red-legged falcon. At any other time I should have begun chasing
dragon-flies or throwing stones at a crow which was sitting on a low mound
under an aspen-tree, with his blunt beak turned away; but at that moment I
was in no mood for mischief. My heart was throbbing, and I felt a cold
sinking at my stomach; I was preparing myself to confront a gentleman with
epaulettes, with a naked sword, and with terrible eyes!


But imagine my disappointment! A dapper little foppish gentleman in white
silk trousers, with a white cap on his head, was walking beside my mother
in the garden. With his hands behind him and his head thrown back, every
now and then running on ahead of mother, he looked quite young. There was
so much life and movement in his whole figure that I could only detect the
treachery of age when I came close up behind and saw beneath his cap a
fringe of close-cropped silver hair. Instead of the staid dignity and
stolidity of a general, I saw an almost schoolboyish nimbleness; instead
of a collar sticking up to his ears, an ordinary light blue necktie.
Mother and my uncle were walking in the avenue talking together. I went
softly up to them from behind, and waited for one of them to look round.


“What a delightful place you have here, Klavdia!” said my uncle. “How
charming and lovely it is! Had I known before that you had such a charming
place, nothing would have induced me to go abroad all these years.”


My uncle stooped down rapidly and sniffed at a tulip. Everything he saw
moved him to rapture and excitement, as though he had never been in a
garden on a sunny day before. The queer man moved about as though he were
on springs, and chattered incessantly, without allowing mother to utter a
single word. All of a sudden Pobyedimsky came into sight from behind an
elder-tree at the turn of the avenue. His appearance was so unexpected
that my uncle positively started and stepped back a pace. On this occasion
my tutor was attired in his best Inverness cape with sleeves, in which,
especially back-view, he looked remarkably like a windmill. He had a
solemn and majestic air. Pressing his hat to his bosom in Spanish style,
he took a step towards my uncle and made a bow such as a marquis makes in
a melodrama, bending forward, a little to one side.


“I have the honour to present myself to your high excellency,” he said
aloud: “the teacher and instructor of your nephew, formerly a pupil of the
veterinary institute, and a nobleman by birth, Pobyedimsky!”


This politeness on the part of my tutor pleased my mother very much. She
gave a smile, and waited in thrilled suspense to hear what clever thing he
would say next; but my tutor, expecting his dignified address to be
answered with equal dignity—that is, that my uncle would say “H’m!”
like a general and hold out two fingers—was greatly confused and
abashed when the latter laughed genially and shook hands with him. He
muttered something incoherent, cleared his throat, and walked away.


“Come! isn’t that charming?” laughed my uncle. “Just look! he has made his
little flourish and thinks he’s a very clever fellow! I do like that—upon
my soul I do! What youthful aplomb, what life in that foolish flourish!
And what boy is this?” he asked, suddenly turning and looking at me.


“That is my Andryushenka,” my mother introduced me, flushing crimson. “My
consolation...”


I made a scrape with my foot on the sand and dropped a low bow.


“A fine fellow... a fine fellow...” muttered my uncle, taking his hand
from my lips and stroking me on the head. “So your name is Andrusha? Yes,
yes.... H’m!... upon my soul!... Do you learn lessons?”


My mother, exaggerating and embellishing as all mothers do, began to
describe my achievements in the sciences and the excellence of my
behaviour, and I walked round my uncle and, following the ceremonial laid
down for me, I continued making low bows. Then my mother began throwing
out hints that with my remarkable abilities it would not be amiss for me
to get a government nomination to the cadet school; but at the point when
I was to have burst into tears and begged for my uncle’s protection, my
uncle suddenly stopped and flung up his hands in amazement.


“My goo-oodness! What’s that?” he asked.


Tatyana Ivanovna, the wife of our bailiff, Fyodor Petrovna, was coming
towards us. She was carrying a starched white petticoat and a long
ironing-board. As she passed us she looked shyly at the visitor through
her eyelashes and flushed crimson.


“Wonders will never cease...” my uncle filtered through his teeth, looking
after her with friendly interest. “You have a fresh surprise at every
step, sister... upon my soul!”


“She’s a beauty...” said mother. “They chose her as a bride for Fyodor,
though she lived over seventy miles from here....”


Not every one would have called Tatyana a beauty. She was a plump little
woman of twenty, with black eyebrows and a graceful figure, always rosy
and attractive-looking, but in her face and in her whole person there was
not one striking feature, not one bold line to catch the eye, as though
nature had lacked inspiration and confidence when creating her. Tatyana
Ivanovna was shy, bashful, and modest in her behaviour; she moved softly
and smoothly, said little, seldom laughed, and her whole life was as
regular as her face and as flat as her smooth, tidy hair. My uncle screwed
up his eyes looking after her, and smiled. Mother looked intently at his
smiling face and grew serious.


“And so, brother, you’ve never married!” she sighed.


“No; I’ve not married.”


“Why not?” asked mother softly.


“How can I tell you? It has happened so. In my youth I was too hard at
work, I had no time to live, and when I longed to live—I looked
round—and there I had fifty years on my back already. I was too
late! However, talking about it... is depressing.”


My mother and my uncle both sighed at once and walked on, and I left them
and flew off to find my tutor, that I might share my impressions with him.
Pobyedimsky was standing in the middle of the yard, looking majestically
at the heavens.


“One can see he is a man of culture!” he said, twisting his head round. “I
hope we shall get on together.”


An hour later mother came to us.


“I am in trouble, my dears!” she began, sighing. “You see brother has
brought a valet with him, and the valet, God bless him, is not one you can
put in the kitchen or in the hall; we must give him a room apart. I can’t
think what I am to do! I tell you what, children, couldn’t you move out
somewhere—to Fyodor’s lodge, for instance—and give your room
to the valet? What do you say?”


We gave our ready consent, for living in the lodge was a great deal more
free than in the house, under mother’s eye.


“It’s a nuisance, and that’s a fact!” said mother. “Brother says he won’t
have dinner in the middle of the day, but between six and seven, as they
do in Petersburg. I am simply distracted with worry! By seven o’clock the
dinner will be done to rags in the oven. Really, men don’t understand
anything about housekeeping, though they have so much intellect. Oh, dear!
we shall have to cook two dinners every day! You will have dinner at
midday as before, children, while your poor old mother has to wait till
seven, for the sake of her brother.”


Then my mother heaved a deep sigh, bade me try and please my uncle, whose
coming was a piece of luck for me for which we must thank God, and hurried
off to the kitchen. Pobyedimsky and I moved into the lodge the same day.
We were installed in a room which formed the passage from the entry to the
bailiff’s bedroom.


Contrary to my expectations, life went on just as before, drearily and
monotonously, in spite of my uncle’s arrival and our move into new
quarters. We were excused lessons “on account of the visitor.”
Pobyedimsky, who never read anything or occupied himself in any way, spent
most of his time sitting on his bed, with his long nose thrust into the
air, thinking. Sometimes he would get up, try on his new suit, and sit
down again to relapse into contemplation and silence. Only one thing
worried him, the flies, which he used mercilessly to squash between his
hands. After dinner he usually “rested,” and his snores were a cause of
annoyance to the whole household. I ran about the garden from morning to
night, or sat in the lodge sticking my kites together. For the first two
or three weeks we did not see my uncle often. For days together he sat in
his own room working, in spite of the flies and the heat. His
extraordinary capacity for sitting as though glued to his table produced
upon us the effect of an inexplicable conjuring trick. To us idlers,
knowing nothing of systematic work, his industry seemed simply miraculous.
Getting up at nine, he sat down to his table, and did not leave it till
dinner-time; after dinner he set to work again, and went on till late at
night. Whenever I peeped through the keyhole I invariably saw the same
thing: my uncle sitting at the table working. The work consisted in his
writing with one hand while he turned over the leaves of a book with the
other, and, strange to say, he kept moving all over—swinging his leg
as though it were a pendulum, whistling, and nodding his head in time. He
had an extremely careless and frivolous expression all the while, as
though he were not working, but playing at noughts and crosses. I always
saw him wearing a smart short jacket and a jauntily tied cravat, and he
always smelt, even through the keyhole, of delicate feminine perfumery. He
only left his room for dinner, but he ate little.


“I can’t make brother out!” mother complained of him. “Every day we kill a
turkey and pigeons on purpose for him, I make a compote with my own
hands, and he eats a plateful of broth and a bit of meat the size of a
finger and gets up from the table. I begin begging him to eat; he comes
back and drinks a glass of milk. And what is there in that, in a glass of
milk? It’s no better than washing up water! You may die of a diet like
that.... If I try to persuade him, he laughs and makes a joke of it....
No; he does not care for our fare, poor dear!”


We spent the evenings far more gaily than the days. As a rule, by the time
the sun was setting and long shadows were lying across the yard, we—that
is, Tatyana Ivanovna, Pobyedimsky, and I—were sitting on the steps
of the lodge. We did not talk till it grew quite dusk. And, indeed, what
is one to talk of when every subject has been talked over already? There
was only one thing new, my uncle’s arrival, and even that subject was soon
exhausted. My tutor never took his eyes off Tatyana Ivanovna ‘s face, and
frequently heaved deep sighs.... At the time I did not understand those
sighs, and did not try to fathom their significance; now they explain a
great deal to me.


When the shadows merged into one thick mass of shade, the bailiff Fyodor
would come in from shooting or from the field. This Fyodor gave me the
impression of being a fierce and even a terrible man. The son of a
Russianized gipsy from Izyumskoe, swarthy-faced and curly-headed, with big
black eyes and a matted beard, he was never called among our Kotchuevko
peasants by any name but “The Devil.” And, indeed, there was a great deal
of the gipsy about him apart from his appearance. He could not, for
instance, stay at home, and went off for days together into the country or
into the woods to shoot. He was gloomy, ill-humoured, taciturn, was afraid
of nobody, and refused to recognize any authority. He was rude to mother,
addressed me familiarly, and was contemptuous of Pobyedimsky’s learning.
All this we forgave him, looking upon him as a hot-tempered and nervous
man; mother liked him because, in spite of his gipsy nature, he was
ideally honest and industrious. He loved his Tatyana Ivanovna
passionately, like a gipsy, but this love took in him a gloomy form, as
though it cost him suffering. He was never affectionate to his wife in our
presence, but simply rolled his eyes angrily at her and twisted his mouth.


When he came in from the fields he would noisily and angrily put down his
gun, would come out to us on the steps, and sit down beside his wife.
After resting a little, he would ask his wife a few questions about
household matters, and then sink into silence.


“Let us sing,” I would suggest.


My tutor would tune his guitar, and in a deep deacon’s bass strike up “In
the midst of the valley.” We would begin singing. My tutor took the bass,
Fyodor sang in a hardly audible tenor, while I sang soprano in unison with
Tatyana Ivanovna.


When the whole sky was covered with stars and the frogs had left off
croaking, they would bring in our supper from the kitchen. We went into
the lodge and sat down to the meal. My tutor and the gipsy ate greedily,
with such a sound that it was hard to tell whether it was the bones
crunching or their jaws, and Tatyana Ivanovna and I scarcely succeeded in
getting our share. After supper the lodge was plunged in deep sleep.


One evening, it was at the end of May, we were sitting on the steps,
waiting for supper. A shadow suddenly fell across us, and Gundasov stood
before us as though he had sprung out of the earth. He looked at us for a
long time, then clasped his hands and laughed gaily.


“An idyll!” he said. “They sing and dream in the moonlight! It’s charming,
upon my soul! May I sit down and dream with you?”


We looked at one another and said nothing. My uncle sat down on the bottom
step, yawned, and looked at the sky. A silence followed. Pobyedimsky, who
had for a long time been wanting to talk to somebody fresh, was delighted
at the opportunity, and was the first to break the silence. He had only
one subject for intellectual conversation, the epizootic diseases. It
sometimes happens that after one has been in an immense crowd, only some
one countenance of the thousands remains long imprinted on the memory; in
the same way, of all that Pobyedimsky had heard, during his six months at
the veterinary institute, he remembered only one passage:


“The epizootics do immense damage to the stock of the country. It is the
duty of society to work hand in hand with the government in waging war
upon them.”


Before saying this to Gundasov, my tutor cleared his throat three times,
and several times, in his excitement, wrapped himself up in his Inverness.
On hearing about the epizootics, my uncle looked intently at my tutor and
made a sound between a snort and a laugh.


“Upon my soul, that’s charming!” he said, scrutinizing us as though we
were mannequins. “This is actually life.... This is really what reality is
bound to be. Why are you silent, Pelagea Ivanovna?” he said, addressing
Tatyana Ivanovna.


She coughed, overcome with confusion.


“Talk, my friends, sing... play!... Don’t lose time. You know, time, the
rascal, runs away and waits for no man! Upon my soul, before you have time
to look round, old age is upon you.... Then it is too late to live! That’s
how it is, Pelagea Ivanovna.... We mustn’t sit still and be silent....”


At that point supper was brought out from the kitchen. Uncle went into the
lodge with us, and to keep us company ate five curd fritters and the wing
of a duck. He ate and looked at us. He was touched and delighted by us
all. Whatever silly nonsense my precious tutor talked, and whatever
Tatyana Ivanovna did, he thought charming and delightful. When after
supper Tatyana Ivanovna sat quietly down and took up her knitting, he kept
his eyes fixed on her fingers and chatted away without ceasing.


“Make all the haste you can to live, my friends...” he said. “God forbid
you should sacrifice the present for the future! There is youth, health,
fire in the present; the future is smoke and deception! As soon as you are
twenty begin to live.”


Tatyana Ivanovna dropped a knitting-needle. My uncle jumped up, picked up
the needle, and handed it to Tatyana Ivanovna with a bow, and for the
first time in my life I learnt that there were people in the world more
refined than Pobyedimsky.


“Yes...” my uncle went on, “love, marry, do silly things. Foolishness is a
great deal more living and healthy than our straining and striving after
rational life.”


My uncle talked a great deal, so much that he bored us; I sat on a box
listening to him and dropping to sleep. It distressed me that he did not
once all the evening pay attention to me. He left the lodge at two
o’clock, when, overcome with drowsiness, I was sound asleep.


From that time forth my uncle took to coming to the lodge every evening.
He sang with us, had supper with us, and always stayed on till two o’clock
in the morning, chatting incessantly, always about the same subject. His
evening and night work was given up, and by the end of June, when the
privy councillor had learned to eat mother’s turkey and compote,
his work by day was abandoned too. My uncle tore himself away from his
table and plunged into “life.” In the daytime he walked up and down the
garden, he whistled to the workmen and hindered them from working, making
them tell him their various histories. When his eye fell on Tatyana
Ivanovna he ran up to her, and, if she were carrying anything, offered his
assistance, which embarrassed her dreadfully.


As the summer advanced my uncle grew more and more frivolous, volatile,
and careless. Pobyedimsky was completely disillusioned in regard to him.


“He is too one-sided,” he said. “There is nothing to show that he is in
the very foremost ranks of the service. And he doesn’t even know how to
talk. At every word it’s ‘upon my soul.’ No, I don’t like him!”


From the time that my uncle began visiting the lodge there was a
noticeable change both in Fyodor and my tutor. Fyodor gave up going out
shooting, came home early, sat more taciturn than ever, and stared with
particular ill-humour at his wife. In my uncle’s presence my tutor gave up
talking about epizootics, frowned, and even laughed sarcastically.


“Here comes our little bantam cock!” he growled on one occasion when my
uncle was coming into the lodge.


I put down this change in them both to their being offended with my uncle.
My absent-minded uncle mixed up their names, and to the very day of his
departure failed to distinguish which was my tutor and which was Tatyana
Ivanovna’s husband. Tatyana Ivanovna herself he sometimes called Nastasya,
sometimes Pelagea, and sometimes Yevdokia. Touched and delighted by us, he
laughed and behaved exactly as though in the company of small children....
All this, of course, might well offend young men. It was not a case of
offended pride, however, but, as I realize now, subtler feelings.


I remember one evening I was sitting on the box struggling with sleep. My
eyelids felt glued together and my body, tired out by running about all
day, drooped sideways. But I struggled against sleep and tried to look on.
It was about midnight. Tatyana Ivanovna, rosy and unassuming as always,
was sitting at a little table sewing at her husband’s shirt. Fyodor,
sullen and gloomy, was staring at her from one corner, and in the other
sat Pobyedimsky, snorting angrily and retreating into the high collar of
his shirt. My uncle was walking up and down the room thinking. Silence
reigned; nothing was to be heard but the rustling of the linen in Tatyana
Ivanovna’s hands. Suddenly my uncle stood still before Tatyana Ivanovna,
and said:


“You are all so young, so fresh, so nice, you live so peacefully in this
quiet place, that I envy you. I have become attached to your way of life
here; my heart aches when I remember I have to go away.... You may believe
in my sincerity!”


Sleep closed my eyes and I lost myself. When some sound waked me, my uncle
was standing before Tatyana Ivanovna, looking at her with a softened
expression. His cheeks were flushed.


“My life has been wasted,” he said. “I have not lived! Your young face
makes me think of my own lost youth, and I should be ready to sit here
watching you to the day of my death. It would be a pleasure to me to take
you with me to Petersburg.”


“What for?” Fyodor asked in a husky voice.


“I should put her under a glass case on my work-table. I should admire her
and show her to other people. You know, Pelagea Ivanovna, we have no women
like you there. Among us there is wealth, distinction, sometimes beauty,
but we have not this true sort of life, this healthy serenity....”


My uncle sat down facing Tatyana Ivanovna and took her by the hand.


“So you won’t come with me to Petersburg?” he laughed. “In that case give
me your little hand.... A charming little hand!... You won’t give it?
Come, you miser! let me kiss it, anyway....”


At that moment there was the scrape of a chair. Fyodor jumped up, and with
heavy, measured steps went up to his wife. His face was pale, grey, and
quivering. He brought his fist down on the table with a bang, and said in
a hollow voice:


“I won’t allow it!”


At the same moment Pobyedimsky jumped up from his chair. He, too, pale and
angry, went up to Tatyana Ivanovna, and he, too, struck the table with his
fist.


“I... I won’t allow it!” he said.


“What, what’s the matter?” asked my uncle in surprise.


“I won’t allow it!” repeated Fyodor, banging on the table.


My uncle jumped up and bIlinked nervously. He tried to speak, but in his
amazement and alarm could not utter a word; with an embarrassed smile, he
shuffled out of the lodge with the hurried step of an old man, leaving his
hat behind. When, a little later, my mother ran into the lodge, Fyodor and
Pobyedimsky were still hammering on the table like blacksmiths and
repeating, “I won’t allow it!”


“What has happened here?” asked mother. “Why has my brother been taken
ill? What’s the matter?”


Looking at Tatyana’s pale, frightened face and at her infuriated husband,
mother probably guessed what was the matter. She sighed and shook her
head.


“Come! give over banging on the table!” she said. “Leave off, Fyodor! And
why are you thumping, Yegor Alexyevitch? What have you got to do with it?”


Pobyedimsky was startled and confused. Fyodor looked intently at him, then
at his wife, and began walking about the room. When mother had gone out of
the lodge, I saw what for long afterwards I looked upon as a dream. I saw
Fyodor seize my tutor, lift him up in the air, and thrust him out of the
door.


When I woke up in the morning my tutor’s bed was empty. To my question
where he was nurse told me in a whisper that he had been taken off early
in the morning to the hospital, as his arm was broken. Distressed at this
intelligence and remembering the scene of the previous evening, I went out
of doors. It was a grey day. The sky was covered with storm-clouds and
there was a wind blowing dust, bits of paper, and feathers along the
ground.... It felt as though rain were coming. There was a look of boredom
in the servants and in the animals. When I went into the house I was told
not to make such a noise with my feet, as mother was ill and in bed with a
migraine. What was I to do? I went outside the gate, sat down on the
little bench there, and fell to trying to discover the meaning of what I
had seen and heard the day before. From our gate there was a road which,
passing the forge and the pool which never dried up, ran into the main
road. I looked at the telegraph-posts, about which clouds of dust were
whirling, and at the sleepy birds sitting on the wires, and I suddenly
felt so dreary that I began to cry.


A dusty wagonette crammed full of townspeople, probably going to visit the
shrine, drove by along the main road. The wagonette was hardly out of
sight when a light chaise with a pair of horses came into view. In it was
Akim Nikititch, the police inspector, standing up and holding on to the
coachman’s belt. To my great surprise, the chaise turned into our road and
flew by me in at the gate. While I was puzzling why the police inspector
had come to see us, I heard a noise, and a carriage with three horses came
into sight on the road. In the carriage stood the police captain,
directing his coachman towards our gate.


“And why is he coming?” I thought, looking at the dusty police captain.
“Most probably Pobyedimsky has complained of Fyodor to him, and they have
come to take him to prison.”


But the mystery was not so easily solved. The police inspector and the
police captain were only the first instalment, for five minutes had
scarcely passed when a coach drove in at our gate. It dashed by me so
swiftly that I could only get a glimpse of a red beard.


Lost in conjecture and full of misgivings, I ran to the house. In the
passage first of all I saw mother; she was pale and looking with horror
towards the door, from which came the sounds of men’s voices. The visitors
had taken her by surprise in the very throes of migraine.


“Who has come, mother?” I asked.


“Sister,” I heard my uncle’s voice, “will you send in something to eat for
the governor and me?”


“It is easy to say ‘something to eat,’” whispered my mother, numb with
horror. “What have I time to get ready now? I am put to shame in my old
age!”


Mother clutched at her head and ran into the kitchen. The governor’s
sudden visit stirred and overwhelmed the whole household. A ferocious
slaughter followed. A dozen fowls, five turkeys, eight ducks, were killed,
and in the fluster the old gander, the progenitor of our whole flock of
geese and a great favourite of mother’s, was beheaded. The coachmen and
the cook seemed frenzied, and slaughtered birds at random, without
distinction of age or breed. For the sake of some wretched sauce a pair of
valuable pigeons, as dear to me as the gander was to mother, were
sacrificed. It was a long while before I could forgive the governor their
death.


In the evening, when the governor and his suite, after a sumptuous dinner,
had got into their carriages and driven away, I went into the house to
look at the remains of the feast. Glancing into the drawing-room from the
passage, I saw my uncle and my mother. My uncle, with his hands behind his
back, was walking nervously up and down close to the wall, shrugging his
shoulders. Mother, exhausted and looking much thinner, was sitting on the
sofa and watching his movements with heavy eyes.


“Excuse me, sister, but this won’t do at all,” my uncle grumbled,
wrinkling up his face. “I introduced the governor to you, and you didn’t
offer to shake hands. You covered him with confusion, poor fellow! No,
that won’t do.... Simplicity is a very good thing, but there must be
limits to it.... Upon my soul! And then that dinner! How can one give
people such things? What was that mess, for instance, that they served for
the fourth course?”


“That was duck with sweet sauce...” mother answered softly.


“Duck! Forgive me, sister, but... but here I’ve got heartburn! I am ill!”


My uncle made a sour, tearful face, and went on:


“It was the devil sent that governor! As though I wanted his visit!
Pff!... heartburn! I can’t work or sleep... I am completely out of
sorts.... And I can’t understand how you can live here without anything to
do... in this boredom! Here I’ve got a pain coming under my
shoulder-blade!...”


My uncle frowned, and walked about more rapidly than ever.


“Brother,” my mother inquired softly, “what would it cost to go abroad?”


“At least three thousand...” my uncle answered in a tearful voice. “I
would go, but where am I to get it? I haven’t a farthing. Pff!...
heartburn!”


My uncle stopped to look dejectedly at the grey, overcast prospect from
the window, and began pacing to and fro again.


A silence followed.... Mother looked a long while at the ikon, pondering
something, then she began crying, and said:


“I’ll give you the three thousand, brother....”


Three days later the majestic boxes went off to the station, and the privy
councillor drove off after them. As he said good-bye to mother he shed
tears, and it was a long time before he took his lips from her hands, but
when he got into his carriage his face beamed with childlike pleasure....
Radiant and happy, he settled himself comfortably, kissed his hand to my
mother, who was crying, and all at once his eye was caught by me. A look
of the utmost astonishment came into his face.


“What boy is this?” he asked.


My mother, who had declared my uncle’s coming was a piece of luck for
which I must thank God, was bitterly mortified at this question. I was in
no mood for questions. I looked at my uncle’s happy face, and for some
reason I felt fearfully sorry for him. I could not resist jumping up to
the carriage and hugging that frivolous man, weak as all men are. Looking
into his face and wanting to say something pleasant, I asked:


“Uncle, have you ever been in a battle?”


“Ah, the dear boy...” laughed my uncle, kissing me. “A charming boy, upon
my soul! How natural, how living it all is, upon my soul!...”


The carriage set off.... I looked after him, and long afterwards that
farewell “upon my soul” was ringing in my ears.








THE MAN IN A CASE

AT the furthest end of the village of Mironositskoe some belated sportsmen
lodged for the night in the elder Prokofy’s barn. There were two of them,
the veterinary surgeon Ivan Ivanovitch and the schoolmaster Burkin. Ivan
Ivanovitch had a rather strange double-barrelled surname—Tchimsha-Himalaisky—which
did not suit him at all, and he was called simply Ivan Ivanovitch all over
the province. He lived at a stud-farm near the town, and had come out
shooting now to get a breath of fresh air. Burkin, the high-school
teacher, stayed every summer at Count P—-’s, and had been
thoroughly at home in this district for years.


They did not sleep. Ivan Ivanovitch, a tall, lean old fellow with long
moustaches, was sitting outside the door, smoking a pipe in the moonlight.
Burkin was lying within on the hay, and could not be seen in the darkness.


They were telling each other all sorts of stories. Among other things,
they spoke of the fact that the elder’s wife, Mavra, a healthy and by no
means stupid woman, had never been beyond her native village, had never
seen a town nor a railway in her life, and had spent the last ten years
sitting behind the stove, and only at night going out into the street.


“What is there wonderful in that!” said Burkin. “There are plenty of
people in the world, solitary by temperament, who try to retreat into
their shell like a hermit crab or a snail. Perhaps it is an instance of
atavism, a return to the period when the ancestor of man was not yet a
social animal and lived alone in his den, or perhaps it is only one of the
diversities of human character—who knows? I am not a natural science
man, and it is not my business to settle such questions; I only mean to
say that people like Mavra are not uncommon. There is no need to look far;
two months ago a man called Byelikov, a colleague of mine, the Greek
master, died in our town. You have heard of him, no doubt. He was
remarkable for always wearing goloshes and a warm wadded coat, and
carrying an umbrella even in the very finest weather. And his umbrella was
in a case, and his watch was in a case made of grey chamois leather, and
when he took out his penknife to sharpen his pencil, his penknife, too,
was in a little case; and his face seemed to be in a case too, because he
always hid it in his turned-up collar. He wore dark spectacles and flannel
vests, stuffed up his ears with cotton-wool, and when he got into a cab
always told the driver to put up the hood. In short, the man displayed a
constant and insurmountable impulse to wrap himself in a covering, to make
himself, so to speak, a case which would isolate him and protect him from
external influences. Reality irritated him, frightened him, kept him in
continual agitation, and, perhaps to justify his timidity, his aversion
for the actual, he always praised the past and what had never existed; and
even the classical languages which he taught were in reality for him
goloshes and umbrellas in which he sheltered himself from real life.


“‘Oh, how sonorous, how beautiful is the Greek language!’ he would say,
with a sugary expression; and as though to prove his words he would screw
up his eyes and, raising his finger, would pronounce ‘Anthropos!’


“And Byelikov tried to hide his thoughts also in a case. The only things
that were clear to his mind were government circulars and newspaper
articles in which something was forbidden. When some proclamation
prohibited the boys from going out in the streets after nine o’clock in
the evening, or some article declared carnal love unlawful, it was to his
mind clear and definite; it was forbidden, and that was enough. For him
there was always a doubtful element, something vague and not fully
expressed, in any sanction or permission. When a dramatic club or a
reading-room or a tea-shop was licensed in the town, he would shake his
head and say softly:


“It is all right, of course; it is all very nice, but I hope it won’t lead
to anything!”


“Every sort of breach of order, deviation or departure from rule,
depressed him, though one would have thought it was no business of his. If
one of his colleagues was late for church or if rumours reached him of
some prank of the high-school boys, or one of the mistresses was seen late
in the evening in the company of an officer, he was much disturbed, and
said he hoped that nothing would come of it. At the teachers’ meetings he
simply oppressed us with his caution, his circumspection, and his
characteristic reflection on the ill-behaviour of the young people in both
male and female high-schools, the uproar in the classes.


“Oh, he hoped it would not reach the ears of the authorities; oh, he hoped
nothing would come of it; and he thought it would be a very good thing if
Petrov were expelled from the second class and Yegorov from the fourth.
And, do you know, by his sighs, his despondency, his black spectacles on
his pale little face, a little face like a pole-cat’s, you know, he
crushed us all, and we gave way, reduced Petrov’s and Yegorov’s marks for
conduct, kept them in, and in the end expelled them both. He had a strange
habit of visiting our lodgings. He would come to a teacher’s, would sit
down, and remain silent, as though he were carefully inspecting something.
He would sit like this in silence for an hour or two and then go away.
This he called ‘maintaining good relations with his colleagues’; and it
was obvious that coming to see us and sitting there was tiresome to him,
and that he came to see us simply because he considered it his duty as our
colleague. We teachers were afraid of him. And even the headmaster was
afraid of him. Would you believe it, our teachers were all intellectual,
right-minded people, brought up on Turgenev and Shtchedrin, yet this
little chap, who always went about with goloshes and an umbrella, had the
whole high-school under his thumb for fifteen long years! High-school,
indeed—he had the whole town under his thumb! Our ladies did not get
up private theatricals on Saturdays for fear he should hear of it, and the
clergy dared not eat meat or play cards in his presence. Under the
influence of people like Byelikov we have got into the way of being afraid
of everything in our town for the last ten or fifteen years. They are
afraid to speak aloud, afraid to send letters, afraid to make
acquaintances, afraid to read books, afraid to help the poor, to teach
people to read and write....”


Ivan Ivanovitch cleared his throat, meaning to say something, but first
lighted his pipe, gazed at the moon, and then said, with pauses:


“Yes, intellectual, right minded people read Shtchedrin and Turgenev,
Buckle, and all the rest of them, yet they knocked under and put up with
it... that’s just how it is.”


“Byelikov lived in the same house as I did,” Burkin went on, “on the same
storey, his door facing mine; we often saw each other, and I knew how he
lived when he was at home. And at home it was the same story:
dressing-gown, nightcap, blinds, bolts, a perfect succession of
prohibitions and restrictions of all sorts, and—‘Oh, I hope nothing
will come of it!’ Lenten fare was bad for him, yet he could not eat meat,
as people might perhaps say Byelikov did not keep the fasts, and he ate
freshwater fish with butter—not a Lenten dish, yet one could not say
that it was meat. He did not keep a female servant for fear people might
think evil of him, but had as cook an old man of sixty, called Afanasy,
half-witted and given to tippling, who had once been an officer’s servant
and could cook after a fashion. This Afanasy was usually standing at the
door with his arms folded; with a deep sigh, he would mutter always the
same thing:


“‘There are plenty of them about nowadays!’


“Byelikov had a little bedroom like a box; his bed had curtains. When he
went to bed he covered his head over; it was hot and stuffy; the wind
battered on the closed doors; there was a droning noise in the stove and a
sound of sighs from the kitchen—ominous sighs.... And he felt
frightened under the bed-clothes. He was afraid that something might
happen, that Afanasy might murder him, that thieves might break in, and so
he had troubled dreams all night, and in the morning, when we went
together to the high-school, he was depressed and pale, and it was evident
that the high-school full of people excited dread and aversion in his
whole being, and that to walk beside me was irksome to a man of his
solitary temperament.


“‘They make a great noise in our classes,’ he used to say, as though
trying to find an explanation for his depression. ‘It’s beyond anything.’


“And the Greek master, this man in a case—would you believe it?—almost
got married.”


Ivan Ivanovitch glanced quickly into the barn, and said:


“You are joking!”


“Yes, strange as it seems, he almost got married. A new teacher of history
and geography, Milhail Savvitch Kovalenko, a Little Russian, was
appointed. He came, not alone, but with his sister Varinka. He was a tall,
dark young man with huge hands, and one could see from his face that he
had a bass voice, and, in fact, he had a voice that seemed to come out of
a barrel—‘boom, boom, boom!’ And she was not so young, about thirty,
but she, too, was tall, well-made, with black eyebrows and red cheeks—in
fact, she was a regular sugar-plum, and so sprightly, so noisy; she was
always singing Little Russian songs and laughing. For the least thing she
would go off into a ringing laugh—‘Ha-ha-ha!’ We made our first
thorough acquaintance with the Kovalenkos at the headmaster’s name-day
party. Among the glum and intensely bored teachers who came even to the
name-day party as a duty we suddenly saw a new Aphrodite risen from the
waves; she walked with her arms akimbo, laughed, sang, danced.... She sang
with feeling ‘The Winds do Blow,’ then another song, and another, and she
fascinated us all—all, even Byelikov. He sat down by her and said
with a honeyed smile:


“‘The Little Russian reminds one of the ancient Greek in its softness and
agreeable resonance.’


“That flattered her, and she began telling him with feeling and
earnestness that they had a farm in the Gadyatchsky district, and that her
mamma lived at the farm, and that they had such pears, such melons, such
kabaks! The Little Russians call pumpkins kabaks (i.e.,
pothouses), while their pothouses they call shinki, and they make a
beetroot soup with tomatoes and aubergines in it, ‘which was so nice—awfully
nice!’


“We listened and listened, and suddenly the same idea dawned upon us all:


“‘It would be a good thing to make a match of it,’ the headmaster’s wife
said to me softly.


“We all for some reason recalled the fact that our friend Byelikov was not
married, and it now seemed to us strange that we had hitherto failed to
observe, and had in fact completely lost sight of, a detail so important
in his life. What was his attitude to woman? How had he settled this vital
question for himself? This had not interested us in the least till then;
perhaps we had not even admitted the idea that a man who went out in all
weathers in goloshes and slept under curtains could be in love.


“‘He is a good deal over forty and she is thirty,’ the headmaster’s wife
went on, developing her idea. ‘I believe she would marry him.’


“All sorts of things are done in the provinces through boredom, all sorts
of unnecessary and nonsensical things! And that is because what is
necessary is not done at all. What need was there for instance, for us to
make a match for this Byelikov, whom one could not even imagine married?
The headmaster’s wife, the inspector’s wife, and all our high-school
ladies, grew livelier and even better-looking, as though they had suddenly
found a new object in life. The headmaster’s wife would take a box at the
theatre, and we beheld sitting in her box Varinka, with such a fan,
beaming and happy, and beside her Byelikov, a little bent figure, looking
as though he had been extracted from his house by pincers. I would give an
evening party, and the ladies would insist on my inviting Byelikov and
Varinka. In short, the machine was set in motion. It appeared that Varinka
was not averse to matrimony. She had not a very cheerful life with her
brother; they could do nothing but quarrel and scold one another from
morning till night. Here is a scene, for instance. Kovalenko would be
coming along the street, a tall, sturdy young ruffian, in an embroidered
shirt, his love-locks falling on his forehead under his cap, in one hand a
bundle of books, in the other a thick knotted stick, followed by his
sister, also with books in her hand.


“‘But you haven’t read it, Mihalik!’ she would be arguing loudly. ‘I tell
you, I swear you have not read it at all!’


“‘And I tell you I have read it,’ cries Kovalenko, thumping his stick on
the pavement.


“‘Oh, my goodness, Mihalik! why are you so cross? We are arguing about
principles.’


“‘I tell you that I have read it!’ Kovalenko would shout, more loudly than
ever.


“And at home, if there was an outsider present, there was sure to be a
skirmish. Such a life must have been wearisome, and of course she must
have longed for a home of her own. Besides, there was her age to be
considered; there was no time left to pick and choose; it was a case of
marrying anybody, even a Greek master. And, indeed, most of our young
ladies don’t mind whom they marry so long as they do get married. However
that may be, Varinka began to show an unmistakable partiality for
Byelikov.


“And Byelikov? He used to visit Kovalenko just as he did us. He would
arrive, sit down, and remain silent. He would sit quiet, and Varinka would
sing to him ‘The Winds do Blow,’ or would look pensively at him with her
dark eyes, or would suddenly go off into a peal—‘Ha-ha-ha!’


“Suggestion plays a great part in love affairs, and still more in getting
married. Everybody—both his colleagues and the ladies—began
assuring Byelikov that he ought to get married, that there was nothing
left for him in life but to get married; we all congratulated him, with
solemn countenances delivered ourselves of various platitudes, such as
‘Marriage is a serious step.’ Besides, Varinka was good-looking and
interesting; she was the daughter of a civil councillor, and had a farm;
and what was more, she was the first woman who had been warm and friendly
in her manner to him. His head was turned, and he decided that he really
ought to get married.”


“Well, at that point you ought to have taken away his goloshes and
umbrella,” said Ivan Ivanovitch.


“Only fancy! that turned out to be impossible. He put Varinka’s portrait
on his table, kept coming to see me and talking about Varinka, and home
life, saying marriage was a serious step. He was frequently at
Kovalenko’s, but he did not alter his manner of life in the least; on the
contrary, indeed, his determination to get married seemed to have a
depressing effect on him. He grew thinner and paler, and seemed to retreat
further and further into his case.


“‘I like Varvara Savvishna,’ he used to say to me, with a faint and wry
smile, ‘and I know that every one ought to get married, but... you know
all this has happened so suddenly.... One must think a little.’


“‘What is there to think over?’ I used to say to him. ‘Get married—that
is all.’


“‘No; marriage is a serious step. One must first weigh the duties before
one, the responsibilities... that nothing may go wrong afterwards. It
worries me so much that I don’t sleep at night. And I must confess I am
afraid: her brother and she have a strange way of thinking; they look at
things strangely, you know, and her disposition is very impetuous. One may
get married, and then, there is no knowing, one may find oneself in an
unpleasant position.’


“And he did not make an offer; he kept putting it off, to the great
vexation of the headmaster’s wife and all our ladies; he went on weighing
his future duties and responsibilities, and meanwhile he went for a walk
with Varinka almost every day—possibly he thought that this was
necessary in his position—and came to see me to talk about family
life. And in all probability in the end he would have proposed to her, and
would have made one of those unnecessary, stupid marriages such as are
made by thousands among us from being bored and having nothing to do, if
it had not been for a kolossalische scandal. I must mention that
Varinka’s brother, Kovalenko, detested Byelikov from the first day of
their acquaintance, and could not endure him.


“‘I don’t understand,’ he used to say to us, shrugging his shoulders—‘I
don’t understand how you can put up with that sneak, that nasty phiz. Ugh!
how can you live here! The atmosphere is stifling and unclean! Do you call
yourselves schoolmasters, teachers? You are paltry government clerks. You
keep, not a temple of science, but a department for red tape and loyal
behaviour, and it smells as sour as a police-station. No, my friends; I
will stay with you for a while, and then I will go to my farm and there
catch crabs and teach the Little Russians. I shall go, and you can stay
here with your Judas—damn his soul!’


“Or he would laugh till he cried, first in a loud bass, then in a shrill,
thin laugh, and ask me, waving his hands:


“‘What does he sit here for? What does he want? He sits and stares.’


“He even gave Byelikov a nickname, ‘The Spider.’ And it will readily be
understood that we avoided talking to him of his sister’s being about to
marry ‘The Spider.’


“And on one occasion, when the headmaster’s wife hinted to him what a good
thing it would be to secure his sister’s future with such a reliable,
universally respected man as Byelikov, he frowned and muttered:


“‘It’s not my business; let her marry a reptile if she likes. I don’t like
meddling in other people’s affairs.’


“Now hear what happened next. Some mischievous person drew a caricature of
Byelikov walking along in his goloshes with his trousers tucked up, under
his umbrella, with Varinka on his arm; below, the inscription ‘Anthropos
in love.’ The expression was caught to a marvel, you know. The artist must
have worked for more than one night, for the teachers of both the boys’
and girls’ high-schools, the teachers of the seminary, the government
officials, all received a copy. Byelikov received one, too. The caricature
made a very painful impression on him.


“We went out together; it was the first of May, a Sunday, and all of us,
the boys and the teachers, had agreed to meet at the high-school and then
to go for a walk together to a wood beyond the town. We set off, and he
was green in the face and gloomier than a storm-cloud.


“‘What wicked, ill-natured people there are!’ he said, and his lips
quivered.


“I felt really sorry for him. We were walking along, and all of a sudden—would
you believe it?—Kovalenko came bowling along on a bicycle, and after
him, also on a bicycle, Varinka, flushed and exhausted, but good-humoured
and gay.


“‘We are going on ahead,’ she called. ‘What lovely weather! Awfully
lovely!’


“And they both disappeared from our sight. Byelikov turned white instead
of green, and seemed petrified. He stopped short and stared at me....


“‘What is the meaning of it? Tell me, please!’ he asked. ‘Can my eyes have
deceived me? Is it the proper thing for high-school masters and ladies to
ride bicycles?’


“‘What is there improper about it?’ I said. ‘Let them ride and enjoy
themselves.’


“‘But how can that be?’ he cried, amazed at my calm. ‘What are you
saying?’


“And he was so shocked that he was unwilling to go on, and returned home.


“Next day he was continually twitching and nervously rubbing his hands,
and it was evident from his face that he was unwell. And he left before
his work was over, for the first time in his life. And he ate no dinner.
Towards evening he wrapped himself up warmly, though it was quite warm
weather, and sallied out to the Kovalenkos’. Varinka was out; he found her
brother, however.


“‘Pray sit down,’ Kovalenko said coldly, with a frown. His face looked
sleepy; he had just had a nap after dinner, and was in a very bad humour.


“Byelikov sat in silence for ten minutes, and then began:


“‘I have come to see you to relieve my mind. I am very, very much
troubled. Some scurrilous fellow has drawn an absurd caricature of me and
another person, in whom we are both deeply interested. I regard it as a
duty to assure you that I have had no hand in it.... I have given no sort
of ground for such ridicule—on the contrary, I have always behaved
in every way like a gentleman.’


“Kovalenko sat sulky and silent. Byelikov waited a little, and went on
slowly in a mournful voice:


“‘And I have something else to say to you. I have been in the service for
years, while you have only lately entered it, and I consider it my duty as
an older colleague to give you a warning. You ride on a bicycle, and that
pastime is utterly unsuitable for an educator of youth.’


“‘Why so?’ asked Kovalenko in his bass.


“‘Surely that needs no explanation, Mihail Savvitch—surely you can
understand that? If the teacher rides a bicycle, what can you expect the
pupils to do? You will have them walking on their heads next! And so long
as there is no formal permission to do so, it is out of the question. I
was horrified yesterday! When I saw your sister everything seemed dancing
before my eyes. A lady or a young girl on a bicycle—it’s awful!’


“‘What is it you want exactly?’


“‘All I want is to warn you, Mihail Savvitch. You are a young man, you
have a future before you, you must be very, very careful in your
behaviour, and you are so careless—oh, so careless! You go about in
an embroidered shirt, are constantly seen in the street carrying books,
and now the bicycle, too. The headmaster will learn that you and your
sister ride the bicycle, and then it will reach the higher authorities....
Will that be a good thing?’


“‘It’s no business of anybody else if my sister and I do bicycle!’ said
Kovalenko, and he turned crimson. ‘And damnation take any one who meddles
in my private affairs!’


“Byelikov turned pale and got up.


“‘If you speak to me in that tone I cannot continue,’ he said. ‘And I beg
you never to express yourself like that about our superiors in my
presence; you ought to be respectful to the authorities.’


“‘Why, have I said any harm of the authorities?’ asked Kovalenko, looking
at him wrathfully. ‘Please leave me alone. I am an honest man, and do not
care to talk to a gentleman like you. I don’t like sneaks!’


“Byelikov flew into a nervous flutter, and began hurriedly putting on his
coat, with an expression of horror on his face. It was the first time in
his life he had been spoken to so rudely.


“‘You can say what you please,’ he said, as he went out from the entry to
the landing on the staircase. ‘I ought only to warn you: possibly some one
may have overheard us, and that our conversation may not be
misunderstood and harm come of it, I shall be compelled to inform our
headmaster of our conversation... in its main features. I am bound to do
so.’


“‘Inform him? You can go and make your report!’


“Kovalenko seized him from behind by the collar and gave him a push, and
Byelikov rolled downstairs, thudding with his goloshes. The staircase was
high and steep, but he rolled to the bottom unhurt, got up, and touched
his nose to see whether his spectacles were all right. But just as he was
falling down the stairs Varinka came in, and with her two ladies; they
stood below staring, and to Byelikov this was more terrible than anything.
I believe he would rather have broken his neck or both legs than have been
an object of ridicule. ‘Why, now the whole town would hear of it; it would
come to the headmaster’s ears, would reach the higher authorities—oh,
it might lead to something! There would be another caricature, and it
would all end in his being asked to resign his post....


“When he got up, Varinka recognized him, and, looking at his ridiculous
face, his crumpled overcoat, and his goloshes, not understanding what had
happened and supposing that he had slipped down by accident, could not
restrain herself, and laughed loud enough to be heard by all the flats:


“‘Ha-ha-ha!’


“And this pealing, ringing ‘Ha-ha-ha!’ was the last straw that put an end
to everything: to the proposed match and to Byelikov’s earthly existence.
He did not hear what Varinka said to him; he saw nothing. On reaching
home, the first thing he did was to remove her portrait from the table;
then he went to bed, and he never got up again.


“Three days later Afanasy came to me and asked whether we should not send
for the doctor, as there was something wrong with his master. I went in to
Byelikov. He lay silent behind the curtain, covered with a quilt; if one
asked him a question, he said ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ and not another sound. He lay
there while Afanasy, gloomy and scowling, hovered about him, sighing
heavily, and smelling like a pothouse.


“A month later Byelikov died. We all went to his funeral—that is,
both the high-schools and the seminary. Now when he was lying in his
coffin his expression was mild, agreeable, even cheerful, as though he
were glad that he had at last been put into a case which he would never
leave again. Yes, he had attained his ideal! And, as though in his honour,
it was dull, rainy weather on the day of his funeral, and we all wore
goloshes and took our umbrellas. Varinka, too, was at the funeral, and
when the coffin was lowered into the grave she burst into tears. I have
noticed that Little Russian women are always laughing or crying—no
intermediate mood.


“One must confess that to bury people like Byelikov is a great pleasure.
As we were returning from the cemetery we wore discreet Lenten faces; no
one wanted to display this feeling of pleasure—a feeling like that
we had experienced long, long ago as children when our elders had gone out
and we ran about the garden for an hour or two, enjoying complete freedom.
Ah, freedom, freedom! The merest hint, the faintest hope of its
possibility gives wings to the soul, does it not?


“We returned from the cemetery in a good humour. But not more than a week
had passed before life went on as in the past, as gloomy, oppressive, and
senseless—a life not forbidden by government prohibition, but not
fully permitted, either: it was no better. And, indeed, though we had
buried Byelikov, how many such men in cases were left, how many more of
them there will be!”


“That’s just how it is,” said Ivan Ivanovitch and he lighted his pipe.


“How many more of them there will be!” repeated Burkin.


The schoolmaster came out of the barn. He was a short, stout man,
completely bald, with a black beard down to his waist. The two dogs came
out with him.


“What a moon!” he said, looking upwards.


It was midnight. On the right could be seen the whole village, a long
street stretching far away for four miles. All was buried in deep silent
slumber; not a movement, not a sound; one could hardly believe that nature
could be so still. When on a moonlight night you see a broad village
street, with its cottages, haystacks, and slumbering willows, a feeling of
calm comes over the soul; in this peace, wrapped away from care, toil, and
sorrow in the darkness of night, it is mild, melancholy, beautiful, and it
seems as though the stars look down upon it kindly and with tenderness,
and as though there were no evil on earth and all were well. On the left
the open country began from the end of the village; it could be seen
stretching far away to the horizon, and there was no movement, no sound in
that whole expanse bathed in moonlight.


“Yes, that is just how it is,” repeated Ivan Ivanovitch; “and isn’t our
living in town, airless and crowded, our writing useless papers, our
playing vint—isn’t that all a sort of case for us? And our
spending our whole lives among trivial, fussy men and silly, idle women,
our talking and our listening to all sorts of nonsense—isn’t that a
case for us, too? If you like, I will tell you a very edifying story.”


“No; it’s time we were asleep,” said Burkin. “Tell it tomorrow.”


They went into the barn and lay down on the hay. And they were both
covered up and beginning to doze when they suddenly heard light footsteps—patter,
patter.... Some one was walking not far from the barn, walking a little
and stopping, and a minute later, patter, patter again.... The dogs began
growling.


“That’s Mavra,” said Burkin.


The footsteps died away.


“You see and hear that they lie,” said Ivan Ivanovitch, turning over on
the other side, “and they call you a fool for putting up with their lying.
You endure insult and humiliation, and dare not openly say that you are on
the side of the honest and the free, and you lie and smile yourself; and
all that for the sake of a crust of bread, for the sake of a warm corner,
for the sake of a wretched little worthless rank in the service. No, one
can’t go on living like this.”


“Well, you are off on another tack now, Ivan Ivanovitch,” said the
schoolmaster. “Let us go to sleep!”


And ten minutes later Burkin was asleep. But Ivan Ivanovitch kept sighing
and turning over from side to side; then he got up, went outside again,
and, sitting in the doorway, lighted his pipe.