TYPHUS

  A

YOUNG lieutenant
      called Klimov was travelling from Petersburg to Moscow in a smoking
      carriage of the mail train. Opposite him was sitting an elderly man with a
      shaven face like a sea captain’s, by all appearances a well-to-do
      Finn or Swede. He pulled at his pipe the whole journey and kept talking
      about the same subject:

 “Ha, you are an officer! I have a brother an officer too, only he is
      a naval officer. . . . He is a naval officer, and he is stationed at
      Kronstadt. Why are you going to Moscow?”

 “I am serving there.”

 “Ha! And are you a family man?”

 “No, I live with my sister and aunt.”

 “My brother’s an officer, only he is a naval officer; he has a
      wife and three children. Ha!”

 The Finn seemed continually surprised at something, and gave a broad
      idiotic grin when he exclaimed “Ha!” and continually puffed at
      his stinking pipe. Klimov, who for some reason did not feel well, and
      found it burdensome to answer questions, hated him with all his heart. He
      dreamed of how nice it would be to snatch the wheezing pipe out of his
      hand and fling it under the seat, and drive the Finn himself into another
      compartment.

 “Detestable people these Finns and . . . Greeks,” he thought.
      “Absolutely superfluous, useless, detestable people. They simply
      fill up space on the earthly globe. What are they for?”

 And the thought of Finns and Greeks produced a feeling akin to sickness
      all over his body. For the sake of comparison he tried to think of the
      French, of the Italians, but his efforts to think of these people evoked
      in his mind, for some reason, nothing but images of organ-grinders, naked
      women, and the foreign oleographs which hung over the chest of drawers at
      home, at his aunt’s.

 Altogether the officer felt in an abnormal state. He could not arrange his
      arms and legs comfortably on the seat, though he had the whole seat to
      himself. His mouth felt dry and sticky; there was a heavy fog in his
      brain; his thoughts seemed to be straying, not only within his head, but
      outside his skull, among the seats and the people that were shrouded in
      the darkness of night. Through the mist in his brain, as through a dream,
      he heard the murmur of voices, the rumble of wheels, the slamming of
      doors. The sounds of the bells, the whistles, the guards, the running to
      and fro of passengers on the platforms, seemed more frequent than usual.
      The time flew by rapidly, imperceptibly, and so it seemed as though the
      train were stopping at stations every minute, and metallic voices crying
      continually:

 “Is the mail ready?”

 “Yes!” was repeatedly coming from outside.

 It seemed as though the man in charge of the heating came in too often to
      look at the thermometer, that the noise of trains going in the opposite
      direction and the rumble of the wheels over the bridges was incessant. The
      noise, the whistles, the Finn, the tobacco smoke—all this mingling
      with the menace and flickering of the misty images in his brain, the shape
      and character of which a man in health can never recall, weighed upon
      Klimov like an unbearable nightmare. In horrible misery he lifted his
      heavy head, looked at the lamp in the rays of which shadows and misty
      blurs seemed to be dancing. He wanted to ask for water, but his parched
      tongue would hardly move, and he scarcely had strength to answer the Finn’s
      questions. He tried to lie down more comfortably and go to sleep, but he
      could not succeed. The Finn several times fell asleep, woke up again,
      lighted his pipe, addressed him with his “Ha!” and went to
      sleep again; and still the lieutenant’s legs could not get into a
      comfortable position, and still the menacing images stood facing him.

 At Spirovo he went out into the station for a drink of water. He saw
      people sitting at the table and hurriedly eating.

 “And how can they eat!” he thought, trying not to sniff the
      air, that smelt of roast meat, and not to look at the munching mouths
      —they both seemed to him sickeningly disgusting.

 A good-looking lady was conversing loudly with a military man in a red
      cap, and showing magnificent white teeth as she smiled; and the smile, and
      the teeth, and the lady herself made on Klimov the same revolting
      impression as the ham and the rissoles. He could not understand how it was
      the military man in the red cap was not ill at ease, sitting beside her
      and looking at her healthy, smiling face.

 When after drinking some water he went back to his carriage, the Finn was
      sitting smoking; his pipe was wheezing and squelching like a golosh with
      holes in it in wet weather.

 “Ha!” he said, surprised; “what station is this?”

 “I don’t know,” answered Klimov, lying down and shutting
      his mouth that he might not breathe the acrid tobacco smoke.

 “And when shall we reach Tver?”

 “I don’t know. Excuse me, I . . . I can’t answer. I am
      ill. I caught cold today.”

 The Finn knocked his pipe against the window-frame and began talking of
      his brother, the naval officer. Klimov no longer heard him; he was
      thinking miserably of his soft, comfortable bed, of a bottle of cold
      water, of his sister Katya, who was so good at making one comfortable,
      soothing, giving one water. He even smiled when the vision of his orderly
      Pavel, taking off his heavy stifling boots and putting water on the little
      table, flitted through his imagination. He fancied that if he could only
      get into his bed, have a drink of water, his nightmare would give place to
      sound healthy sleep.

 “Is the mail ready?” a hollow voice reached him from the
      distance.

 “Yes,” answered a bass voice almost at the window.

 It was already the second or third station from Spirovo.

 The time was flying rapidly in leaps and bounds, and it seemed as though
      the bells, whistles, and stoppings would never end. In despair Klimov
      buried his face in the corner of the seat, clutched his head in his hands,
      and began again thinking of his sister Katya and his orderly Pavel, but
      his sister and his orderly were mixed up with the misty images in his
      brain, whirled round, and disappeared. His burning breath, reflected from
      the back of the seat, seemed to scald his face; his legs were
      uncomfortable; there was a draught from the window on his back; but,
      however wretched he was, he did not want to change his position. . . . A
      heavy nightmarish lethargy gradually gained possession of him and fettered
      his limbs.

 When he brought himself to raise his head, it was already light in the
      carriage. The passengers were putting on their fur coats and moving about.
      The train was stopping. Porters in white aprons and with discs on their
      breasts were bustling among the passengers and snatching up their boxes.
      Klimov put on his great-coat, mechanically followed the other passengers
      out of the carriage, and it seemed to him that not he, but some one else
      was moving, and he felt that his fever, his thirst, and the menacing
      images which had not let him sleep all night, came out of the carriage
      with him. Mechanically he took his luggage and engaged a sledge-driver.
      The man asked him for a rouble and a quarter to drive to Povarsky Street,
      but he did not haggle, and without protest got submissively into the
      sledge. He still understood the difference of numbers, but money had
      ceased to have any value to him.

 At home Klimov was met by his aunt and his sister Katya, a girl of
      eighteen. When Katya greeted him she had a pencil and exercise book in her
      hand, and he remembered that she was preparing for an examination as a
      teacher. Gasping with fever, he walked aimlessly through all the rooms
      without answering their questions or greetings, and when he reached his
      bed he sank down on the pillow. The Finn, the red cap, the lady with the
      white teeth, the smell of roast meat, the flickering blurs, filled his
      consciousness, and by now he did not know where he was and did not hear
      the agitated voices.

 When he recovered consciousness he found himself in bed, undressed, saw a
      bottle of water and Pavel, but it was no cooler, nor softer, nor more
      comfortable for that. His arms and legs, as before, refused to lie
      comfortably; his tongue stuck to the roof of his mouth, and he heard the
      wheezing of the Finn’s pipe. . . . A stalwart, black-bearded doctor
      was busy doing something beside the bed, brushing against Pavel with his
      broad back.

 “It’s all right, it’s all right, young man,” he
      muttered. “Excellent, excellent . . . goo-od, goo-od . . . !”

 The doctor called Klimov “young man,” said “goo-od”
      instead of “good” and “so-o” instead of “so.”

 “So-o . . . so-o . . . so-o,” he murmured. “Goo-od,
      goo-od . . . ! Excellent, young man. You mustn’t lose heart!”

 The doctor’s rapid, careless talk, his well-fed countenance, and
      condescending “young man,” irritated Klimov.

 “Why do you call me ‘young man’?” he moaned.
      “What familiarity! Damn it all!”

 And he was frightened by his own voice. The voice was so dried up, so weak
      and peevish, that he would not have known it.

 “Excellent, excellent!” muttered the doctor, not in the least
      offended. . . . “You mustn’t get angry, so-o, so-o, so-s. . .
      .”

 And the time flew by at home with the same startling swiftness as in the
      railway carriage. The daylight was continually being replaced by the dusk
      of evening. The doctor seemed never to leave his bedside, and he heard at
      every moment his “so-o, so-o, so-o.” A continual succession of
      people was incessantly crossing the bedroom. Among them were: Pavel, the
      Finn, Captain Yaroshevitch, Lance-Corporal Maximenko, the red cap, the
      lady with the white teeth, the doctor. They were all talking and waving
      their arms, smoking and eating. Once by daylight Klimov saw the chaplain
      of the regiment, Father Alexandr, who was standing before the bed, wearing
      a stole and with a prayer-book in his hand. He was muttering something
      with a grave face such as Klimov had never seen in him before. The
      lieutenant remembered that Father Alexandr used in a friendly way to call
      all the Catholic officers “Poles,” and wanting to amuse him,
      he cried:

 “Father, Yaroshevitch the Pole has climbed up a pole!”

 But Father Alexandr, a light-hearted man who loved a joke, did not smile,
      but became graver than ever, and made the sign of the cross over Klimov.
      At night-time by turn two shadows came noiselessly in and out; they were
      his aunt and sister. His sister’s shadow knelt down and prayed; she
      bowed down to the ikon, and her grey shadow on the wall bowed down too, so
      that two shadows were praying. The whole time there was a smell of roast
      meat and the Finn’s pipe, but once Klimov smelt the strong smell of
      incense. He felt so sick he could not lie still, and began shouting:

 “The incense! Take away the incense!”

 There was no answer. He could only hear the subdued singing of the priest
      somewhere and some one running upstairs.

 When Klimov came to himself there was not a soul in his bedroom. The
      morning sun was streaming in at the window through the lower blind, and a
      quivering sunbeam, bright and keen as the sword’s edge, was flashing
      on the glass bottle. He heard the rattle of wheels— so there was no
      snow now in the street. The lieutenant looked at the ray, at the familiar
      furniture, at the door, and the first thing he did was to laugh. His chest
      and stomach heaved with delicious, happy, tickling laughter. His whole
      body from head to foot was overcome by a sensation of infinite happiness
      and joy in life, such as the first man must have felt when he was created
      and first saw the world. Klimov felt a passionate desire for movement,
      people, talk. His body lay a motionless block; only his hands stirred, but
      that he hardly noticed, and his whole attention was concentrated on
      trifles. He rejoiced in his breathing, in his laughter, rejoiced in the
      existence of the water-bottle, the ceiling, the sunshine, the tape on the
      curtains. God’s world, even in the narrow space of his bedroom,
      seemed beautiful, varied, grand. When the doctor made his appearance, the
      lieutenant was thinking what a delicious thing medicine was, how charming
      and pleasant the doctor was, and how nice and interesting people were in
      general.

 “So-o, so, so. . . Excellent, excellent! . . . Now we are well
      again. . . . Goo-od, goo-od!” the doctor pattered.

 The lieutenant listened and laughed joyously; he remembered the Finn, the
      lady with the white teeth, the train, and he longed to smoke, to eat.

 “Doctor,” he said, “tell them to give me a crust of rye
      bread and salt, and . . . and sardines.”

 The doctor refused; Pavel did not obey the order, and did not go for the
      bread. The lieutenant could not bear this and began crying like a naughty
      child.

 “Baby!” laughed the doctor. “Mammy, bye-bye!”

 Klimov laughed, too, and when the doctor went away he fell into a sound
      sleep. He woke up with the same joyfulness and sensation of happiness. His
      aunt was sitting near the bed.

 “Well, aunt,” he said joyfully. “What has been the
      matter?”

 “Spotted typhus.”

 “Really. But now I am well, quite well! Where is Katya?”

 “She is not at home. I suppose she has gone somewhere from her
      examination.”

 The old lady said this and looked at her stocking; her lips began
      quivering, she turned away, and suddenly broke into sobs. Forgetting the
      doctor’s prohibition in her despair, she said:

 “Ah, Katya, Katya! Our angel is gone! Is gone!”

 She dropped her stocking and bent down to it, and as she did so her cap
      fell off her head. Looking at her grey head and understanding nothing,
      Klimov was frightened for Katya, and asked:

 “Where is she, aunt?”

 The old woman, who had forgotten Klimov and was thinking only of her
      sorrow, said:

 “She caught typhus from you, and is dead. She was buried the day
      before yesterday.”

 This terrible, unexpected news was fully grasped by Klimov’s
      consciousness; but terrible and startling as it was, it could not overcome
      the animal joy that filled the convalescent. He cried and laughed, and
      soon began scolding because they would not let him eat.

 Only a week later when, leaning on Pavel, he went in his dressing-gown to
      the window, looked at the overcast spring sky and listened to the
      unpleasant clang of the old iron rails which were being carted by, his
      heart ached, he burst into tears, and leaned his forehead against the
      window-frame.

 “How miserable I am!” he muttered. “My God, how
      miserable!”

 And joy gave way to the boredom of everyday life and the feeling of his
      irrevocable loss.

  





   

  









 A MISFORTUNE

  S

OFYA PETROVNA, the
      wife of Lubyantsev the notary, a handsome young woman of five-and-twenty,
      was walking slowly along a track that had been cleared in the wood, with
      Ilyin, a lawyer who was spending the summer in the neighbourhood. It was
      five o’clock in the evening. Feathery-white masses of cloud stood
      overhead; patches of bright blue sky peeped out between them. The clouds
      stood motionless, as though they had caught in the tops of the tall old
      pine-trees. It was still and sultry.

 Farther on, the track was crossed by a low railway embankment on which a
      sentinel with a gun was for some reason pacing up and down. Just beyond
      the embankment there was a large white church with six domes and a rusty
      roof.

 “I did not expect to meet you here,” said Sofya Petrovna,
      looking at the ground and prodding at the last year’s leaves with
      the tip of her parasol, “and now I am glad we have met. I want to
      speak to you seriously and once for all. I beg you, Ivan Mihalovitch, if
      you really love and respect me, please make an end of this pursuit of me!
      You follow me about like a shadow, you are continually looking at me not
      in a nice way, making love to me, writing me strange letters, and . . .
      and I don’t know where it’s all going to end! Why, what can
      come of it?”

 Ilyin said nothing. Sofya Petrovna walked on a few steps and continued:

 “And this complete transformation in you all came about in the
      course of two or three weeks, after five years’ friendship. I don’t
      know you, Ivan Mihalovitch!”

 Sofya Petrovna stole a glance at her companion. Screwing up his eyes, he
      was looking intently at the fluffy clouds. His face looked angry,
      ill-humoured, and preoccupied, like that of a man in pain forced to listen
      to nonsense.

 “I wonder you don’t see it yourself,” Madame Lubyantsev
      went on, shrugging her shoulders. “You ought to realize that it’s
      not a very nice part you are playing. I am married; I love and respect my
      husband. . . . I have a daughter . . . . Can you think all that means
      nothing? Besides, as an old friend you know my attitude to family life and
      my views as to the sanctity of marriage.”

 Ilyin cleared his throat angrily and heaved a sigh.

 “Sanctity of marriage . . .” he muttered. “Oh, Lord!”

 “Yes, yes. . . . I love my husband, I respect him; and in any case I
      value the peace of my home. I would rather let myself be killed than be a
      cause of unhappiness to Andrey and his daughter. . . . And I beg you, Ivan
      Mihalovitch, for God’s sake, leave me in peace! Let us be as good,
      true friends as we used to be, and give up these sighs and groans, which
      really don’t suit you. It’s settled and over! Not a word more
      about it. Let us talk of something else.”

 Sofya Petrovna again stole a glance at Ilyin’s face. Ilyin was
      looking up; he was pale, and was angrily biting his quivering lips. She
      could not understand why he was angry and why he was indignant, but his
      pallor touched her.

 “Don’t be angry; let us be friends,” she said
      affectionately. “Agreed? Here’s my hand.”

 Ilyin took her plump little hand in both of his, squeezed it, and slowly
      raised it to his lips.

 “I am not a schoolboy,” he muttered. “I am not in the
      least tempted by friendship with the woman I love.”

 “Enough, enough! It’s settled and done with. We have reached
      the seat; let us sit down.”

 Sofya Petrovna’s soul was filled with a sweet sense of relief: the
      most difficult and delicate thing had been said, the painful question was
      settled and done with. Now she could breathe freely and look Ilyin
      straight in the face. She looked at him, and the egoistic feeling of the
      superiority of the woman over the man who loves her, agreeably flattered
      her. It pleased her to see this huge, strong man, with his manly, angry
      face and his big black beard—clever, cultivated, and, people said,
      talented—sit down obediently beside her and bow his head dejectedly.
      For two or three minutes they sat without speaking.

 “Nothing is settled or done with,” began Ilyin. “You
      repeat copy-book maxims to me. ‘I love and respect my husband . . .
      the sanctity of marriage. . . .’ I know all that without your help,
      and I could tell you more, too. I tell you truthfully and honestly that I
      consider the way I am behaving as criminal and immoral. What more can one
      say than that? But what’s the good of saying what everybody knows?
      Instead of feeding nightingales with paltry words, you had much better
      tell me what I am to do.”

 “I’ve told you already—go away.”

 “As you know perfectly well, I have gone away five times, and every
      time I turned back on the way. I can show you my through tickets —I’ve
      kept them all. I have not will enough to run away from you! I am
      struggling. I am struggling horribly; but what the devil am I good for if
      I have no backbone, if I am weak, cowardly! I can’t struggle with
      Nature! Do you understand? I cannot! I run away from here, and she holds
      on to me and pulls me back. Contemptible, loathsome weakness!”

 Ilyin flushed crimson, got up, and walked up and down by the seat.

 “I feel as cross as a dog,” he muttered, clenching his fists.
      “I hate and despise myself! My God! like some depraved schoolboy, I
      am making love to another man’s wife, writing idiotic letters,
      degrading myself . . . ugh!”

 Ilyin clutched at his head, grunted, and sat down. “And then your
      insincerity!” he went on bitterly. “If you do dislike my
      disgusting behaviour, why have you come here? What drew you here? In my
      letters I only ask you for a direct, definite answer—yes or no; but
      instead of a direct answer, you contrive every day these ‘chance’
      meetings with me and regale me with copy-book maxims!”

 Madame Lubyantsev was frightened and flushed. She suddenly felt the
      awkwardness which a decent woman feels when she is accidentally discovered
      undressed.

 “You seem to suspect I am playing with you,” she muttered.
      “I have always given you a direct answer, and . . . only today I’ve
      begged you . . .”

 “Ough! as though one begged in such cases! If you were to say
      straight out ‘Get away,’ I should have been gone long ago; but
      you’ve never said that. You’ve never once given me a direct
      answer. Strange indecision! Yes, indeed; either you are playing with me,
      or else . . .”

 Ilyin leaned his head on his fists without finishing. Sofya Petrovna began
      going over in her own mind the way she had behaved from beginning to end.
      She remembered that not only in her actions, but even in her secret
      thoughts, she had always been opposed to Ilyin’s love-making; but
      yet she felt there was a grain of truth in the lawyer’s words. But
      not knowing exactly what the truth was, she could not find answers to make
      to Ilyin’s complaint, however hard she thought. It was awkward to be
      silent, and, shrugging her shoulders, she said:

 So I am to blame, it appears.”

 “I don’t blame you for your insincerity,” sighed Ilyin.
      “I did not mean that when I spoke of it. . . . Your insincerity is
      natural and in the order of things. If people agreed together and suddenly
      became sincere, everything would go to the devil.”

 Sofya Petrovna was in no mood for philosophical reflections, but she was
      glad of a chance to change the conversation, and asked:

 “But why?”

 “Because only savage women and animals are sincere. Once
      civilization has introduced a demand for such comforts as, for instance,
      feminine virtue, sincerity is out of place. . . .”

 Ilyin jabbed his stick angrily into the sand. Madame Lubyantsev listened
      to him and liked his conversation, though a great deal of it she did not
      understand. What gratified her most was that she, an ordinary woman, was
      talked to by a talented man on “intellectual” subjects; it
      afforded her great pleasure, too, to watch the working of his mobile,
      young face, which was still pale and angry. She failed to understand a
      great deal that he said, but what was clear to her in his words was the
      attractive boldness with which the modern man without hesitation or doubt
      decides great questions and draws conclusive deductions.

 She suddenly realized that she was admiring him, and was alarmed.

 “Forgive me, but I don’t understand,” she said
      hurriedly. “What makes you talk of insincerity? I repeat my request
      again: be my good, true friend; let me alone! I beg you most earnestly!”

 “Very good; I’ll try again,” sighed Ilyin. “Glad
      to do my best. . . . Only I doubt whether anything will come of my
      efforts. Either I shall put a bullet through my brains or take to drink in
      an idiotic way. I shall come to a bad end! There’s a limit to
      everything— to struggles with Nature, too. Tell me, how can one
      struggle against madness? If you drink wine, how are you to struggle
      against intoxication? What am I to do if your image has grown into my
      soul, and day and night stands persistently before my eyes, like that pine
      there at this moment? Come, tell me, what hard and difficult thing can I
      do to get free from this abominable, miserable condition, in which all my
      thoughts, desires, and dreams are no longer my own, but belong to some
      demon who has taken possession of me? I love you, love you so much that I
      am completely thrown out of gear; I’ve given up my work and all who
      are dear to me; I’ve forgotten my God! I’ve never been in love
      like this in my life.”

 Sofya Petrovna, who had not expected such a turn to their conversation,
      drew away from Ilyin and looked into his face in dismay. Tears came into
      his eyes, his lips were quivering, and there was an imploring, hungry
      expression in his face.

 “I love you!” he muttered, bringing his eyes near her big,
      frightened eyes. “You are so beautiful! I am in agony now, but I
      swear I would sit here all my life, suffering and looking in your eyes.
      But . . . be silent, I implore you!”

 Sofya Petrovna, feeling utterly disconcerted, tried to think as quickly as
      possible of something to say to stop him. “I’ll go away,”
      she decided, but before she had time to make a movement to get up, Ilyin
      was on his knees before her. . . . He was clasping her knees, gazing into
      her face and speaking passionately, hotly, eloquently. In her terror and
      confusion she did not hear his words; for some reason now, at this
      dangerous moment, while her knees were being agreeably squeezed and felt
      as though they were in a warm bath, she was trying, with a sort of angry
      spite, to interpret her own sensations. She was angry that instead of
      brimming over with protesting virtue, she was entirely overwhelmed with
      weakness, apathy, and emptiness, like a drunken man utterly reckless; only
      at the bottom of her soul a remote bit of herself was malignantly taunting
      her: “Why don’t you go? Is this as it should be? Yes?”

 Seeking for some explanation, she could not understand how it was she did
      not pull away the hand to which Ilyin was clinging like a leech, and why,
      like Ilyin, she hastily glanced to right and to left to see whether any
      one was looking. The clouds and the pines stood motionless, looking at
      them severely, like old ushers seeing mischief, but bribed not to tell the
      school authorities. The sentry stood like a post on the embankment and
      seemed to be looking at the seat.

 “Let him look,” thought Sofya Petrovna.

 “But . . . but listen,” she said at last, with despair in her
      voice. “What can come of this? What will be the end of this?”

 “I don’t know, I don’t know,” he whispered, waving
      off the disagreeable questions.

 They heard the hoarse, discordant whistle of the train. This cold,
      irrelevant sound from the everyday world of prose made Sofya Petrovna
      rouse herself.

 “I can’t stay . . . it’s time I was at home,” she
      said, getting up quickly. “The train is coming in. . . Andrey is
      coming by it! He will want his dinner.”

 Sofya Petrovna turned towards the embankment with a burning face. The
      engine slowly crawled by, then came the carriages. It was not the local
      train, as she had supposed, but a goods train. The trucks filed by against
      the background of the white church in a long string like the days of a man’s
      life, and it seemed as though it would never end.

 But at last the train passed, and the last carriage with the guard and a
      light in it had disappeared behind the trees. Sofya Petrovna turned round
      sharply, and without looking at Ilyin, walked rapidly back along the
      track. She had regained her self-possession. Crimson with shame,
      humiliated not by Ilyin—no, but by her own cowardice, by the
      shamelessness with which she, a chaste and high-principled woman, had
      allowed a man, not her husband, to hug her knees—she had only one
      thought now: to get home as quickly as possible to her villa, to her
      family. The lawyer could hardly keep pace with her. Turning from the
      clearing into a narrow path, she turned round and glanced at him so
      quickly that she saw nothing but the sand on his knees, and waved to him
      to drop behind.

 Reaching home, Sofya Petrovna stood in the middle of her room for five
      minutes without moving, and looked first at the window and then at her
      writing-table.

 “You low creature!” she said, upbraiding herself. “You
      low creature!”

 To spite herself, she recalled in precise detail, keeping nothing back—she
      recalled that though all this time she had been opposed to Ilyin’s
      lovemaking, something had impelled her to seek an interview with him; and
      what was more, when he was at her feet she had enjoyed it enormously. She
      recalled it all without sparing herself, and now, breathless with shame,
      she would have liked to slap herself in the face.

 “Poor Andrey!” she said to herself, trying as she thought of
      her husband to put into her face as tender an expression as she could.
      “Varya, my poor little girl, doesn’t know what a mother she
      has! Forgive me, my dear ones! I love you so much . . . so much!”

 And anxious to prove to herself that she was still a good wife and mother,
      and that corruption had not yet touched that “sanctity of marriage”
      of which she had spoken to Ilyin, Sofya Petrovna ran to the kitchen and
      abused the cook for not having yet laid the table for Andrey Ilyitch. She
      tried to picture her husband’s hungry and exhausted appearance,
      commiserated him aloud, and laid the table for him with her own hands,
      which she had never done before. Then she found her daughter Varya, picked
      her up in her arms and hugged her warmly; the child seemed to her cold and
      heavy, but she was unwilling to acknowledge this to herself, and she began
      explaining to the child how good, kind, and honourable her papa was.

 But when Andrey Ilyitch arrived soon afterwards she hardly greeted him.
      The rush of false feeling had already passed off without proving anything
      to her, only irritating and exasperating her by its falsity. She was
      sitting by the window, feeling miserable and cross. It is only by being in
      trouble that people can understand how far from easy it is to be the
      master of one’s feelings and thoughts. Sofya Petrovna said
      afterwards that there was a tangle within her which it was as difficult to
      unravel as to count a flock of sparrows rapidly flying by. From the fact
      that she was not overjoyed to see her husband, that she did not like his
      manner at dinner, she concluded all of a sudden that she was beginning to
      hate her husband.

 Andrey Ilyitch, languid with hunger and exhaustion, fell upon the sausage
      while waiting for the soup to be brought in, and ate it greedily, munching
      noisily and moving his temples.

 “My goodness!” thought Sofya Petrovna. “I love and
      respect him, but . . . why does he munch so repulsively?”

 The disorder in her thoughts was no less than the disorder in her
      feelings. Like all persons inexperienced in combating unpleasant ideas,
      Madame Lubyantsev did her utmost not to think of her trouble, and the
      harder she tried the more vividly Ilyin, the sand on his knees, the fluffy
      clouds, the train, stood out in her imagination.

 “And why did I go there this afternoon like a fool?” she
      thought, tormenting herself. “And am I really so weak that I cannot
      depend upon myself?”

 Fear magnifies danger. By the time Andrey Ilyitch was finishing the last
      course, she had firmly made up her mind to tell her husband everything and
      to flee from danger!

 “I’ve something serious to say to you, Andrey,” she
      began after dinner while her husband was taking off his coat and boots to
      lie down for a nap.

 “Well?”

 “Let us leave this place!”

 “H’m! . . . Where shall we go? It’s too soon to go back
      to town.”

 “No; for a tour or something of that sort.

 “For a tour . . .” repeated the notary, stretching. “I
      dream of that myself, but where are we to get the money, and to whom am I
      to leave the office?”

 And thinking a little he added:

 “Of course, you must be bored. Go by yourself if you like.”

 Sofya Petrovna agreed, but at once reflected that Ilyin would be delighted
      with the opportunity, and would go with her in the same train, in the same
      compartment. . . . She thought and looked at her husband, now satisfied
      but still languid. For some reason her eyes rested on his feet—miniature,
      almost feminine feet, clad in striped socks; there was a thread standing
      out at the tip of each sock.

 Behind the blind a bumble-bee was beating itself against the window-pane
      and buzzing. Sofya Petrovna looked at the threads on the socks, listened
      to the bee, and pictured how she would set off . . . . vis-à-vis Ilyin would sit, day and night, never taking his eyes off her, wrathful at
      his own weakness and pale with spiritual agony. He would call himself an
      immoral schoolboy, would abuse her, tear his hair, but when darkness came
      on and the passengers were asleep or got out at a station, he would seize
      the opportunity to kneel before her and embrace her knees as he had at the
      seat in the wood. . . .

 She caught herself indulging in this day-dream.

 “Listen. I won’t go alone,” she said. “You must
      come with me.”

 “Nonsense, Sofotchka!” sighed Lubyantsev. “One must be
      sensible and not want the impossible.”

 “You will come when you know all about it,” thought Sofya
      Petrovna.

 Making up her mind to go at all costs, she felt that she was out of
      danger. Little by little her ideas grew clearer; her spirits rose and she
      allowed herself to think about it all, feeling that however much she
      thought, however much she dreamed, she would go away. While her husband
      was asleep, the evening gradually came on. She sat in the drawing-room and
      played the piano. The greater liveliness out of doors, the sound of music,
      but above all the thought that she was a sensible person, that she had
      surmounted her difficulties, completely restored her spirits. Other women,
      her appeased conscience told her, would probably have been carried off
      their feet in her position, and would have lost their balance, while she
      had almost died of shame, had been miserable, and was now running out of
      the danger which perhaps did not exist! She was so touched by her own
      virtue and determination that she even looked at herself two or three
      times in the looking-glass.

 When it got dark, visitors arrived. The men sat down in the dining-room to
      play cards; the ladies remained in the drawing-room and the verandah. The
      last to arrive was Ilyin. He was gloomy, morose, and looked ill. He sat
      down in the corner of the sofa and did not move the whole evening. Usually
      good-humoured and talkative, this time he remained silent, frowned, and
      rubbed his eyebrows. When he had to answer some question, he gave a forced
      smile with his upper lip only, and answered jerkily and irritably. Four or
      five times he made some jest, but his jests sounded harsh and cutting. It
      seemed to Sofya Petrovna that he was on the verge of hysterics. Only now,
      sitting at the piano, she recognized fully for the first time that this
      unhappy man was in deadly earnest, that his soul was sick, and that he
      could find no rest. For her sake he was wasting the best days of his youth
      and his career, spending the last of his money on a summer villa,
      abandoning his mother and sisters, and, worst of all, wearing himself out
      in an agonizing struggle with himself. From mere common humanity he ought
      to be treated seriously.

 She recognized all this clearly till it made her heart ache, and if at
      that moment she had gone up to him and said to him, “No,”
      there would have been a force in her voice hard to disobey. But she did
      not go up to him and did not speak—indeed, never thought of doing
      so. The pettiness and egoism of youth had never been more patent in her
      than that evening. She realized that Ilyin was unhappy, and that he was
      sitting on the sofa as though he were on hot coals; she felt sorry for
      him, but at the same time the presence of a man who loved her to
      distraction, filled her soul with triumph and a sense of her own power.
      She felt her youth, her beauty, and her unassailable virtue, and, since
      she had decided to go away, gave herself full licence for that evening.
      She flirted, laughed incessantly, sang with peculiar feeling and gusto.
      Everything delighted and amused her. She was amused at the memory of what
      had happened at the seat in the wood, of the sentinel who had looked on.
      She was amused by her guests, by Ilyin’s cutting jests, by the pin
      in his cravat, which she had never noticed before. There was a red snake
      with diamond eyes on the pin; this snake struck her as so amusing that she
      could have kissed it on the spot.

 Sofya Petrovna sang nervously, with defiant recklessness as though half
      intoxicated, and she chose sad, mournful songs which dealt with wasted
      hopes, the past, old age, as though in mockery of another’s grief.
      “‘And old age comes nearer and nearer’ . . .” she
      sang. And what was old age to her?

 “It seems as though there is something going wrong with me,”
      she thought from time to time through her laughter and singing.

 The party broke up at twelve o’clock. Ilyin was the last to leave.
      Sofya Petrovna was still reckless enough to accompany him to the bottom
      step of the verandah. She wanted to tell him that she was going away with
      her husband, and to watch the effect this news would produce on him.

 The moon was hidden behind the clouds, but it was light enough for Sofya
      Petrovna to see how the wind played with the skirts of his overcoat and
      with the awning of the verandah. She could see, too, how white Ilyin was,
      and how he twisted his upper lip in the effort to smile.

 “Sonia, Sonitchka . . . my darling woman!” he muttered,
      preventing her from speaking. “My dear! my sweet!”

 In a rush of tenderness, with tears in his voice, he showered caressing
      words upon her, that grew tenderer and tenderer, and even called her
      “thou,” as though she were his wife or mistress. Quite
      unexpectedly he put one arm round her waist and with the other hand took
      hold of her elbow.

 “My precious! my delight!” he whispered, kissing the nape of
      her neck; “be sincere; come to me at once!”

 She slipped out of his arms and raised her head to give vent to her
      indignation and anger, but the indignation did not come off, and all her
      vaunted virtue and chastity was only sufficient to enable her to utter the
      phrase used by all ordinary women on such occasions:

 “You must be mad.”

 “Come, let us go,” Ilyin continued. “I felt just now, as
      well as at the seat in the wood, that you are as helpless as I am, Sonia .
      . . . You are in the same plight! You love me and are fruitlessly trying
      to appease your conscience. . . .”

 Seeing that she was moving away, he caught her by her lace cuff and said
      rapidly:

 “If not today, then tomorrow you will have to give in! Why, then,
      this waste of time? My precious, darling Sonia, the sentence is passed;
      why put off the execution? Why deceive yourself?”

 Sofya Petrovna tore herself from him and darted in at the door. Returning
      to the drawing-room, she mechanically shut the piano, looked for a long
      time at the music-stand, and sat down. She could not stand up nor think.
      All that was left of her excitement and recklessness was a fearful
      weakness, apathy, and dreariness. Her conscience whispered to her that she
      had behaved badly, foolishly, that evening, like some madcap girl—that
      she had just been embraced on the verandah, and still had an uneasy
      feeling in her waist and her elbow. There was not a soul in the
      drawing-room; there was only one candle burning. Madame Lubyantsev sat on
      the round stool before the piano, motionless, as though expecting
      something. And as though taking advantage of the darkness and her extreme
      lassitude, an oppressive, overpowering desire began to assail her. Like a
      boa-constrictor it gripped her limbs and her soul, and grew stronger every
      second, and no longer menaced her as it had done, but stood clear before
      her in all its nakedness.

 She sat for half an hour without stirring, not restraining herself from
      thinking of Ilyin, then she got up languidly and dragged herself to her
      bedroom. Andrey Ilyitch was already in bed. She sat down by the open
      window and gave herself up to desire. There was no “tangle”
      now in her head; all her thoughts and feelings were bent with one accord
      upon a single aim. She tried to struggle against it, but instantly gave it
      up. . . . She understood now how strong and relentless was the foe.
      Strength and fortitude were needed to combat him, and her birth, her
      education, and her life had given her nothing to fall back upon.

 “Immoral wretch! Low creature!” she nagged at herself for her
      weakness. “So that’s what you’re like!”

 Her outraged sense of propriety was moved to such indignation by this
      weakness that she lavished upon herself every term of abuse she knew, and
      told herself many offensive and humiliating truths. So, for instance, she
      told herself that she never had been moral, that she had not come to grief
      before simply because she had had no opportunity, that her inward conflict
      during that day had all been a farce. . . .

 “And even if I have struggled,” she thought, “what sort
      of struggle was it? Even the woman who sells herself struggles before she
      brings herself to it, and yet she sells herself. A fine struggle! Like
      milk, I’ve turned in a day! In one day!”

 She convicted herself of being tempted, not by feeling, not by Ilyin
      personally, but by sensations which awaited her . . . an idle lady, having
      her fling in the summer holidays, like so many!

 “‘Like an unfledged bird when the mother has been slain,’”
      sang a husky tenor outside the window.

 “If I am to go, it’s time,” thought Sofya Petrovna. Her
      heart suddenly began beating violently.

 “Andrey!” she almost shrieked. “Listen! we . . . we are
      going? Yes?”

 “Yes, I’ve told you already: you go alone.”

 “But listen,” she began. “If you don’t go with me,
      you are in danger of losing me. I believe I am . . . in love already.”

 “With whom?” asked Andrey Ilyitch.

 “It can’t make any difference to you who it is!” cried
      Sofya Petrovna.

 Andrey Ilyitch sat up with his feet out of bed and looked wonderingly at
      his wife’s dark figure.

 “It’s a fancy!” he yawned.

 He did not believe her, but yet he was frightened. After thinking a little
      and asking his wife several unimportant questions, he delivered himself of
      his opinions on the family, on infidelity . . . spoke listlessly for about
      ten minutes and got into bed again. His moralizing produced no effect.
      There are a great many opinions in the world, and a good half of them are
      held by people who have never been in trouble!

 In spite of the late hour, summer visitors were still walking outside.
      Sofya Petrovna put on a light cape, stood a little, thought a little. . .
      . She still had resolution enough to say to her sleeping husband:

 “Are you asleep? I am going for a walk. . . . Will you come with me?”

 That was her last hope. Receiving no answer, she went out. . . . It was
      fresh and windy. She was conscious neither of the wind nor the darkness,
      but went on and on. . . . An overmastering force drove her on, and it
      seemed as though, if she had stopped, it would have pushed her in the
      back.

 “Immoral creature!” she muttered mechanically. “Low
      wretch!”

 She was breathless, hot with shame, did not feel her legs under her, but
      what drove her on was stronger than shame, reason, or fear.