UP IN MICHIGAN

 Jim Gilmore came to Hortons Bay from Canada. He
bought the blacksmith shop from old man Horton.
Jim was short and dark with big mustaches and big
hands. He was a good horseshoer and did not look
much like a blacksmith even with his leather apron
on. He lived upstairs above the blacksmith shop and
took his meals at A. J. Smith’s.

Liz Coates worked for Smith’s. Mrs. Smith, who
was a very large clean woman, said Liz Coates was
the neatest girl she’d ever seen. Liz had good legs
and always wore clean gingham aprons and Jim
noticed that her hair was always neat behind. He
liked her face because it was so jolly but he never
thought about her.

Liz liked Jim very much. She liked it the way he
walked over from the shop and often went to the
kitchen door to watch for him to start down the
road. She liked it about his mustache. She liked it
about how white his teeth were when he smiled. She
liked it very much that he didn’t look like a blacksmith.
She liked it how much A. J. Smith and Mrs. Smith
liked Jim. One day she found that she liked
it the way the hair was black on his arms and how
white they were above the tanned line when he washed
up in the washbasin outside the house. Liking that
made her feel funny.

Hortons Bay, the town, was only five houses on
the main road between Boyne City and Charlevoix.
There was the general store and postoffice with a
high false front and maybe a wagon hitched out in
front, Smith’s house, Stroud’s house, Fox’s house,
Horton’s house and Van Hoosen’s house. The houses
were in a big grove of elm trees and the road was
very sandy. There was farming country and timber
each way up the road. Up the road a ways was the
Methodist church and down the road the other direction
was the township school. The blacksmith shop
was painted red and faced the school.

A steep sandy road ran down the hill to the bay
through the timber. From Smith’s back door you
could look out across the woods that ran down to the
lake and across the bay. It was very beautiful in the
spring and summer, the bay blue and bright and
usually whitecaps on the lake out beyond the point
from the breeze blowing from Charlevoix and Lake
Michigan. From Smith’s back door Liz could see
ore barges way out in the lake going toward Boyne
City. When she looked at them they didn’t seem to
be moving at all but if she went in and dried some
more dishes and then came out again they would
be out of sight beyond the point.

All the time now Liz was thinking about Jim Gilmore.
He didn’t seem to notice her much. He talked
about the shop to A. J. Smith and about the Republican
Party and about James G. Blaine. In the evenings
he read the Toledo Blade and the Grand Rapids
paper by the lamp in the front room or went out
spearing fish in the bay with a jacklight with A. J.
Smith. In the fall he and Smith and Charley Wyman
took a wagon and tent, grub, axes, their rifles and
two dogs and went on a trip to the pine plains beyond
Vanderbilt deer hunting. Liz and Mrs. Smith were
cooking for four days for them before they started.
Liz wanted to make something special for Jim to
take but she didn’t finally because she was afraid to
ask Mrs. Smith for the eggs and flour and afraid if
she bought them Mrs. Smith would catch her cooking.
It would have been all right with Mrs. Smith but
Liz was afraid.

All the time Jim was gone on the deer hunting trip
Liz thought about him. It was awful while he was
gone. She couldn’t sleep well from thinking about
him but she discovered it was fun to think about him
too. If she let herself go it was better. The night before
they were to come back she didn’t sleep at all, that
is she didn’t think she slept because it was all mixed
up in a dream about not sleeping and really not sleeping.
When she saw the wagon coming down the
road she felt weak and sick sort of inside. She couldn’t
wait till she saw Jim and it seemed as though everything
would be all right when he came. The wagon
stopped outside under the big elm and Mrs. Smith
and Liz went out. All the men had beards and there
were three deer in the back of the wagon, their thin
legs sticking stiff over the edge of the wagon box.
Mrs. Smith kissed Alonzo and he hugged her. Jim said
“Hello Liz.” and grinned. Liz hadn’t known just
what would happen when Jim got back but she was
sure it would be something. Nothing had happened.
The men were just home that was all. Jim pulled the
burlap sacks off the deer and Liz looked at them.
One was a big buck. It was stiff and hard to lift out
of the wagon.

“Did you shoot it Jim?” Liz asked.

“Yeah. Aint it a beauty?” Jim got it onto his
back to carry to the smokehouse.

That night Charley Wyman stayed to supper at
Smith’s. It was too late to get back to Charlevoix.
The men washed up and waited in the front room
for supper.

“Aint there something left in that crock Jimmy?”
A. J. Smith asked and Jim went out to the wagon
in the barn and fetched in the jug of whiskey the
men had taken hunting with them. It was a four
gallon jug and there was quite a little slopped back
and forth in the bottom. Jim took a long pull on his
way back to the house. It was hard to lift such a big
jug up to drink out of it. Some of the whiskey ran
down on his shirt front. The two men smiled when
Jim came in with the jug. A. J. Smith sent for glasses
and Liz brought them. A. J. poured out three big
shots.

“Well here’s looking at you A. J.” said Charley
Wyman.

“That damn big buck Jimmy.” said A. J.

“Here’s all the ones we missed A. J.” said Jim
and downed his liquor.

“Tastes good to a man.”

“Nothing like it this time of year for what ails
you.”

“How about another boys?”

“Here’s how A. J.”

“Down the creek boys.”

“Here’s to next year.”

Jim began to feel great. He loved the taste and the
feel of whisky. He was glad to be back to a comfortable
bed and warm food and the shop. He had another
drink. The men came in to supper feeling hilarious
but acting very respectable. Liz sat at the table
after she put on the food and ate with the family. It
was a good dinner. The men ate seriously. After
supper they went into the front room again and Liz
cleaned off with Mrs. Smith. Then Mrs. Smith went
up stairs and pretty soon Smith came out and went
up stairs too. Jim and Charley were still in the front
room. Liz was sitting in the kitchen next to the stove
pretending to read a book and thinking about Jim.
She didn’t want to go to bed yet because she knew
Jim would be coming out and she wanted to see him
as he went out so she could take the way he looked
up to bed with her.

She was thinking about him hard and then Jim
came out. His eyes were shining and his hair was a
little rumpled. Liz looked down at her book. Jim
came over back of her chair and stood there and she
could feel him breathing and then he put his arms
around her. Her breasts felt plump and firm and the
nipples were erect under his hands. Liz was terribly
frightened, no one had ever touched her, but she
thought, “He’s come to me finally. He’s really
come.”

She held herself stiff because she was so frightened
and did not know anything else to do and then Jim
held her tight against the chair and kissed her. It
was such a sharp, aching, hurting feeling that she
thought she couldn’t stand it. She felt Jim right
through the back of the chair and she couldn’t stand
it and then something clicked inside of her and the
feeling was warmer and softer. Jim held her tight
hard against the chair and she wanted it now and
Jim whispered, “Come on for a walk.”

Liz took her coat off the peg on the kitchen wall
and they went out the door. Jim had his arm around
her and every little way they stopped and pressed
against each other and Jim kissed her. There was
no moon and they walked ankle deep in the sandy
road through the trees down to the dock and the
warehouse on the bay. The water was lapping in the
piles and the point was dark across the bay. It was cold
but Liz was hot all over from being with Jim.
They sat down in the shelter of the warehouse and
Jim pulled Liz close to him. She was frightened.
One of Jim’s hands went inside her dress and stroked
over her breast and the other hand was in her lap.
She was very frightened and didn’t know how he
was going to go about things but she snuggled close
to him. Then the hand that felt so big in her lap
went away and was on her leg and started to move
up it.

“Don’t Jim”. Liz said. Jim slid the hand further
up.

“You musn’t Jim. You musn’t”. Neither Jim
nor Jim’s big hand paid any attention to her.

The boards were hard. Jim had her dress up and
was trying to do something to her. She was frightened
but she wanted it. She had to have it but it frightened
her.

“You musn’t do it Jim. You musn’t.”

“I got to. I’m going to. You know we got to.”

“No we haven’t Jim. We aint got to. Oh it isn’t
right. Oh it’s so big and it hurts so. You can’t. Oh
Jim. Jim. Oh.”

The hemlock planks of the dock were hard and
splintery and cold and Jim was heavy on her and
he had hurt her. Liz pushed him, she was so uncomfortable
and cramped. Jim was asleep. He wouldn’t
move. She worked out from under him and sat up
and straightened her skirt and coat and tried to do
something with her hair. Jim was sleeping with his
mouth a little open. Liz leaned over and kissed him
on the cheek. He was still asleep. She lifted his head
a little and shook it. He rolled his head over and
swallowed. Liz started to cry. She walked over to
the edge of the dock and looked down to the water.
There was a mist coming up from the bay. She was
cold and miserable and everything felt gone. She
walked back to where Jim was lying and shook him
once more to make sure. She was crying.

“Jim” she said, “Jim. Please Jim”.

Jim stirred and curled a little tighter. Liz took
off her coat and leaned over and covered him with it.
She tucked it around him neatly and carefully. Then
she walked across the dock and up the steep sandy
road to go to bed. A cold mist was coming up through
the woods from the bay.