UPROOTED
    

An Incident of My Travels


I WAS on my way
      back from evening service. The clock in the belfry of the Svyatogorsky
      Monastery pealed out its soft melodious chimes by way of prelude and then
      struck twelve. The great courtyard of the monastery stretched out at the
      foot of the Holy Mountains on the banks of the Donets, and, enclosed by
      the high hostel buildings as by a wall, seemed now in the night, when it
      was lighted up only by dim lanterns, lights in the windows, and the stars,
      a living hotch-potch full of movement, sound, and the most original
      confusion. From end to end, so far as the eye could see, it was all choked
      up with carts, old-fashioned coaches and chaises, vans, tilt-carts, about
      which stood crowds of horses, dark and white, and horned oxen, while
      people bustled about, and black long-skirted lay brothers threaded their
      way in and out in all directions. Shadows and streaks of light cast from
      the windows moved over the carts and the heads of men and horses, and in
      the dense twilight this all assumed the most monstrous capricious shapes:
      here the tilted shafts stretched upwards to the sky, here eyes of fire
      appeared in the face of a horse, there a lay brother grew a pair of black
      wings. . . . There was the noise of talk, the snorting and munching of
      horses, the creaking of carts, the whimpering of children. Fresh crowds
      kept walking in at the gate and belated carts drove up.
    

      The pines which were piled up on the overhanging mountain, one above
      another, and leaned towards the roof of the hostel, gazed into the
      courtyard as into a deep pit, and listened in wonder; in their dark
      thicket the cuckoos and nightingales never ceased calling. . . . Looking
      at the confusion, listening to the uproar, one fancied that in this living
      hotch-potch no one understood anyone, that everyone was looking for
      something and would not find it, and that this multitude of carts, chaises
      and human beings could not ever succeed in getting off.
    

      More than ten thousand people flocked to the Holy Mountains for the
      festivals of St. John the Divine and St. Nikolay the wonder-worker. Not
      only the hostel buildings, but even the bakehouse, the tailoring room, the
      carpenter’s shop, the carriage house, were filled to overflowing. .
      . . Those who had arrived towards night clustered like flies in autumn, by
      the walls, round the wells in the yard, or in the narrow passages of the
      hostel, waiting to be shown a resting-place for the night. The lay
      brothers, young and old, were in an incessant movement, with no rest or
      hope of being relieved. By day or late at night they produced the same
      impression of men hastening somewhere and agitated by something, yet, in
      spite of their extreme exhaustion, their faces remained full of courage
      and kindly welcome, their voices friendly, their movements rapid. . . .
      For everyone who came they had to find a place to sleep, and to provide
      food and drink; to those who were deaf, slow to understand, or profuse in
      questions, they had to give long and wearisome explanations, to tell them
      why there were no empty rooms, at what o’clock the service was to be
      where holy bread was sold, and so on. They had to run, to carry, to talk
      incessantly, but more than that, they had to be polite, too, to be
      tactful, to try to arrange that the Greeks from Mariupol, accustomed to
      live more comfortably than the Little Russians, should be put with other
      Greeks, that some shopkeeper from Bahmut or Lisitchansk, dressed like a
      lady, should not be offended by being put with peasants. There were
      continual cries of: “Father, kindly give us some kvass! Kindly give
      us some hay!” or “Father, may I drink water after confession?”
      And the lay brother would have to give out kvass or hay or to answer:
      “Address yourself to the priest, my good woman, we have not the
      authority to give permission.” Another question would follow,
      “Where is the priest then?” and the lay brother would have to
      explain where was the priest’s cell. With all this bustling
      activity, he yet had to make time to go to service in the church, to serve
      in the part devoted to the gentry, and to give full answers to the mass of
      necessary and unnecessary questions which pilgrims of the educated class
      are fond of showering about them. Watching them during the course of
      twenty-four hours, I found it hard to imagine when these black moving
      figures sat down and when they slept.
    

      When, coming back from the evening service, I went to the hostel in which
      a place had been assigned me, the monk in charge of the sleeping quarters
      was standing in the doorway, and beside him, on the steps, was a group of
      several men and women dressed like townsfolk.
    

      “Sir,” said the monk, stopping me, “will you be so good
      as to allow this young man to pass the night in your room? If you would do
      us the favour! There are so many people and no place left—it is
      really dreadful!”
    

      And he indicated a short figure in a light overcoat and a straw hat. I
      consented, and my chance companion followed me. Unlocking the little
      padlock on my door, I was always, whether I wanted to or not, obliged to
      look at the picture that hung on the doorpost on a level with my face.
      This picture with the title, “A Meditation on Death,” depicted
      a monk on his knees, gazing at a coffin and at a skeleton laying in it.
      Behind the man’s back stood another skeleton, somewhat more solid
      and carrying a scythe.
    

      “There are no bones like that,” said my companion, pointing to
      the place in the skeleton where there ought to have been a pelvis. “Speaking
      generally, you know, the spiritual fare provided for the people is not of
      the first quality,” he added, and heaved through his nose a long and
      very melancholy sigh, meant to show me that I had to do with a man who
      really knew something about spiritual fare.
    

      While I was looking for the matches to light a candle he sighed once more
      and said:
    

      “When I was in Harkov I went several times to the anatomy theatre
      and saw the bones there; I have even been in the mortuary. Am I not in
      your way?”
    

      My room was small and poky, with neither table nor chairs in it, but quite
      filled up with a chest of drawers by the window, the stove and two little
      wooden sofas which stood against the walls, facing one another, leaving a
      narrow space to walk between them. Thin rusty-looking little mattresses
      lay on the little sofas, as well as my belongings. There were two sofas,
      so this room was evidently intended for two, and I pointed out the fact to
      my companion.
    

      “They will soon be ringing for mass, though,” he said, “and
      I shan’t have to be in your way very long.”
    

      Still under the impression that he was in my way and feeling awkward, he
      moved with a guilty step to his little sofa, sighed guiltily and sat down.
      When the tallow candle with its dim, dilatory flame had left off
      flickering and burned up sufficiently to make us both visible, I could
      make out what he was like. He was a young man of two-and-twenty, with a
      round and pleasing face, dark childlike eyes, dressed like a townsman in
      grey cheap clothes, and as one could judge from his complexion and narrow
      shoulders, not used to manual labour. He was of a very indefinite type;
      one could take him neither for a student nor for a man in trade, still
      less for a workman. But looking at his attractive face and childlike
      friendly eyes, I was unwilling to believe he was one of those vagabond
      impostors with whom every conventual establishment where they give food
      and lodging is flooded, and who give themselves out as divinity students,
      expelled for standing up for justice, or for church singers who have lost
      their voice. . . . There was something characteristic, typical, very
      familiar in his face, but what exactly, I could not remember nor make out.
    

      For a long time he sat silent, pondering. Probably because I had not shown
      appreciation of his remarks about bones and the mortuary, he thought that
      I was ill-humoured and displeased at his presence. Pulling a sausage out
      of his pocket, he turned it about before his eyes and said irresolutely:
    

      “Excuse my troubling you, . . . have you a knife?”
    

      I gave him a knife.
    

      “The sausage is disgusting,” he said, frowning and cutting
      himself off a little bit. “In the shop here they sell you rubbish
      and fleece you horribly. . . . I would offer you a piece, but you would
      scarcely care to consume it. Will you have some?”
    

      In his language, too, there was something typical that had a very great
      deal in common with what was characteristic in his face, but what it was
      exactly I still could not decide. To inspire confidence and to show that I
      was not ill-humoured, I took some of the proffered sausage. It certainly
      was horrible; one needed the teeth of a good house-dog to deal with it. As
      we worked our jaws we got into conversation; we began complaining to each
      other of the lengthiness of the service.
    

      “The rule here approaches that of Mount Athos,” I said;
      “but at Athos the night services last ten hours, and on great
      feast-days —fourteen! You should go there for prayers!”
    

      “Yes,” answered my companion, and he wagged his head, “I
      have been here for three weeks. And you know, every day services, every
      day services. On ordinary days at midnight they ring for matins, at five o’clock
      for early mass, at nine o’clock for late mass. Sleep is utterly out
      of the question. In the daytime there are hymns of praise, special
      prayers, vespers. . . . And when I was preparing for the sacrament I was
      simply dropping from exhaustion.” He sighed and went on: “And
      it’s awkward not to go to church. . . . The monks give one a room,
      feed one, and, you know, one is ashamed not to go. One wouldn’t mind
      standing it for a day or two, perhaps, but three weeks is too much—much
      too much! Are you here for long?”
    

      “I am going to-morrow evening.”
    

      “But I am staying another fortnight.”
    

      “But I thought it was not the rule to stay for so long here?”
      I said.
    

      “Yes, that’s true: if anyone stays too long, sponging on the
      monks, he is asked to go. Judge for yourself, if the proletariat were
      allowed to stay on here as long as they liked there would never be a room
      vacant, and they would eat up the whole monastery. That’s true. But
      the monks make an exception for me, and I hope they won’t turn me
      out for some time. You know I am a convert.”
    

      “You mean?”
    

      “I am a Jew baptized. . . . Only lately I have embraced orthodoxy.”
    

      Now I understood what I had before been utterly unable to understand from
      his face: his thick lips, and his way of twitching up the right corner of
      his mouth and his right eyebrow, when he was talking, and that peculiar
      oily brilliance of his eyes which is only found in Jews. I understood,
      too, his phraseology. . . . From further conversation I learned that his
      name was Alexandr Ivanitch, and had in the past been Isaac, that he was a
      native of the Mogilev province, and that he had come to the Holy Mountains
      from Novotcherkassk, where he had adopted the orthodox faith.
    

      Having finished his sausage, Alexandr Ivanitch got up, and, raising his
      right eyebrow, said his prayer before the ikon. The eyebrow remained up
      when he sat down again on the little sofa and began giving me a brief
      account of his long biography.
    

      “From early childhood I cherished a love for learning,” he
      began in a tone which suggested he was not speaking of himself, but of
      some great man of the past. “My parents were poor Hebrews; they
      exist by buying and selling in a small way; they live like beggars, you
      know, in filth. In fact, all the people there are poor and superstitious;
      they don’t like education, because education, very naturally, turns
      a man away from religion. . . . They are fearful fanatics. . . . Nothing
      would induce my parents to let me be educated, and they wanted me to take
      to trade, too, and to know nothing but the Talmud. . . . But you will
      agree, it is not everyone who can spend his whole life struggling for a
      crust of bread, wallowing in filth, and mumbling the Talmud. At times
      officers and country gentlemen would put up at papa’s inn, and they
      used to talk a great deal of things which in those days I had never
      dreamed of; and, of course, it was alluring and moved me to envy. I used
      to cry and entreat them to send me to school, but they taught me to read
      Hebrew and nothing more. Once I found a Russian newspaper, and took it
      home with me to make a kite of it. I was beaten for it, though I couldn’t
      read Russian. Of course, fanaticism is inevitable, for every people
      instinctively strives to preserve its nationality, but I did not know that
      then and was very indignant. . . .”
    

      Having made such an intellectual observation, Isaac, as he had been,
      raised his right eyebrow higher than ever in his satisfaction and looked
      at me, as it were, sideways, like a cock at a grain of corn, with an air
      as though he would say: “Now at last you see for certain that I am
      an intellectual man, don’t you?” After saying something more
      about fanaticism and his irresistible yearning for enlightenment, he went
      on:
    

      “What could I do? I ran away to Smolensk. And there I had a cousin
      who relined saucepans and made tins. Of course, I was glad to work under
      him, as I had nothing to live upon; I was barefoot and in rags. . . . I
      thought I could work by day and study at night and on Saturdays. And so I
      did, but the police found out I had no passport and sent me back by stages
      to my father. . . .”
    

      Alexandr Ivanitch shrugged one shoulder and sighed.
    

      “What was one to do?” he went on, and the more vividly the
      past rose up before his mind, the more marked his Jewish accent became.
      “My parents punished me and handed me over to my grandfather, a
      fanatical old Jew, to be reformed. But I went off at night to Shklov. And
      when my uncle tried to catch me in Shklov, I went off to Mogilev; there I
      stayed two days and then I went off to Starodub with a comrade.”
    

      Later on he mentioned in his story Gonel, Kiev, Byelaya, Tserkov, Uman,
      Balt, Bendery and at last reached Odessa.
    

      “In Odessa I wandered about for a whole week, out of work and
      hungry, till I was taken in by some Jews who went about the town buying
      second-hand clothes. I knew how to read and write by then, and had done
      arithmetic up to fractions, and I wanted to go to study somewhere, but I
      had not the means. What was I to do? For six months I went about Odessa
      buying old clothes, but the Jews paid me no wages, the rascals. I resented
      it and left them. Then I went by steamer to Perekop.”
    

      “What for?”
    

      “Oh, nothing. A Greek promised me a job there. In short, till I was
      sixteen I wandered about like that with no definite work and no roots till
      I got to Poltava. There a student, a Jew, found out that I wanted to
      study, and gave me a letter to the Harkov students. Of course, I went to
      Harkov. The students consulted together and began to prepare me for the
      technical school. And, you know, I must say the students that I met there
      were such that I shall never forget them to the day of my death. To say
      nothing of their giving me food and lodging, they set me on the right
      path, they made me think, showed me the object of life. Among them were
      intellectual remarkable people who by now are celebrated. For instance,
      you have heard of Grumaher, haven’t you?”
    

      “No, I haven’t.”
    

      “You haven’t! He wrote very clever articles in the Harkov
      Gazette, and was preparing to be a professor. Well, I read a great
      deal and attended the student’s societies, where you hear nothing
      that is commonplace. I was working up for six months, but as one has to
      have been through the whole high-school course of mathematics to enter the
      technical school, Grumaher advised me to try for the veterinary institute,
      where they admit high-school boys from the sixth form. Of course, I began
      working for it. I did not want to be a veterinary surgeon but they told me
      that after finishing the course at the veterinary institute I should be
      admitted to the faculty of medicine without examination. I learnt all
      KÃ¼hner; I could read Cornelius Nepos, Ã  livre ouvert; and in Greek
      I read through almost all Curtius. But, you know, one thing and another, .
      . . the students leaving and the uncertainty of my position, and then I
      heard that my mamma had come and was looking for me all over Harkov. Then
      I went away. What was I to do? But luckily I learned that there was a
      school of mines here on the Donets line. Why should I not enter that? You
      know the school of mines qualifies one as a mining foreman—a
      splendid berth. I know of mines where the foremen get a salary of fifteen
      hundred a year. Capital. . . . I entered it. . . .”
    

      With an expression of reverent awe on his face Alexandr Ivanitch
      enumerated some two dozen abstruse sciences in which instruction was given
      at the school of mines; he described the school itself, the construction
      of the shafts, and the condition of the miners. . . . Then he told me a
      terrible story which sounded like an invention, though I could not help
      believing it, for his tone in telling it was too genuine and the
      expression of horror on his Semitic face was too evidently sincere.
    

      “While I was doing the practical work, I had such an accident one
      day!” he said, raising both eyebrows. “I was at a mine here in
      the Donets district. You have seen, I dare say, how people are let down
      into the mine. You remember when they start the horse and set the gates
      moving one bucket on the pulley goes down into the mine, while the other
      comes up; when the first begins to come up, then the second goes down—exactly
      like a well with two pails. Well, one day I got into the bucket, began
      going down, and can you fancy, all at once I heard, Trrr! The chain had
      broken and I flew to the devil together with the bucket and the broken bit
      of chain. . . . I fell from a height of twenty feet, flat on my chest and
      stomach, while the bucket, being heavier, reached the bottom before me,
      and I hit this shoulder here against its edge. I lay, you know, stunned. I
      thought I was killed, and all at once I saw a fresh calamity: the other
      bucket, which was going up, having lost the counter-balancing weight, was
      coming down with a crash straight upon me. . . . What was I to do? Seeing
      the position, I squeezed closer to the wall, crouching and waiting for the
      bucket to come full crush next minute on my head. I thought of papa and
      mamma and Mogilev and Grumaher. . . . I prayed. . . . But happily . . . it
      frightens me even to think of it. . . .”
    

      Alexandr Ivanitch gave a constrained smile and rubbed his forehead with
      his hand.
    

      “But happily it fell beside me and only caught this side a little. .
      . . It tore off coat, shirt and skin, you know, from this side. . . . The
      force of it was terrific. I was unconscious after it. They got me out and
      sent me to the hospital. I was there four months, and the doctors there
      said I should go into consumption. I always have a cough now and a pain in
      my chest. And my psychic condition is terrible. . . . When I am alone in a
      room I feel overcome with terror. Of course, with my health in that state,
      to be a mining foreman is out of the question. I had to give up the school
      of mines. . . .”
    

      “And what are you doing now?” I asked.
    

      “I have passed my examination as a village schoolmaster. Now I
      belong to the orthodox church, and I have a right to be a teacher. In
      Novotcherkassk, where I was baptized, they took a great interest in me and
      promised me a place in a church parish school. I am going there in a
      fortnight, and shall ask again.”
    

      Alexandr Ivanitch took off his overcoat and remained in a shirt with an
      embroidered Russian collar and a worsted belt.
    

      “It is time for bed,” he said, folding his overcoat for a
      pillow, and yawning. “Till lately, you know, I had no knowledge of
      God at all. I was an atheist. When I was lying in the hospital I thought
      of religion, and began reflecting on that subject. In my opinion, there is
      only one religion possible for a thinking man, and that is the Christian
      religion. If you don’t believe in Christ, then there is nothing else
      to believe in, . . . is there? Judaism has outlived its day, and is
      preserved only owing to the peculiarities of the Jewish race. When
      civilization reaches the Jews there will not be a trace of Judaism left.
      All young Jews are atheists now, observe. The New Testament is the natural
      continuation of the Old, isn’t it?”
    

      I began trying to find out the reasons which had led him to take so grave
      and bold a step as the change of religion, but he kept repeating the same,
      “The New Testament is the natural continuation of the Old”—a
      formula obviously not his own, but acquired— which did not explain
      the question in the least. In spite of my efforts and artifices, the
      reasons remained obscure. If one could believe that he had embraced
      Orthodoxy from conviction, as he said he had done, what was the nature and
      foundation of this conviction it was impossible to grasp from his words.
      It was equally impossible to assume that he had changed his religion from
      interested motives: his cheap shabby clothes, his going on living at the
      expense of the convent, and the uncertainty of his future, did not look
      like interested motives. There was nothing for it but to accept the idea
      that my companion had been impelled to change his religion by the same
      restless spirit which had flung him like a chip of wood from town to town,
      and which he, using the generally accepted formula, called the craving for
      enlightenment.
    

      Before going to bed I went into the corridor to get a drink of water. When
      I came back my companion was standing in the middle of the room, and he
      looked at me with a scared expression. His face looked a greyish white,
      and there were drops of perspiration on his forehead.
    

      “My nerves are in an awful state,” he muttered with a sickly
      smile,” awful! It’s acute psychological disturbance. But that’s
      of no consequence.”
    

      And he began reasoning again that the New Testament was a natural
      continuation of the Old, that Judaism has outlived its day. . . . Picking
      out his phrases, he seemed to be trying to put together the forces of his
      conviction and to smother with them the uneasiness of his soul, and to
      prove to himself that in giving up the religion of his fathers he had done
      nothing dreadful or peculiar, but had acted as a thinking man free from
      prejudice, and that therefore he could boldly remain in a room all alone
      with his conscience. He was trying to convince himself, and with his eyes
      besought my assistance.
    

      Meanwhile a big clumsy wick had burned up on our tallow candle. It was by
      now getting light. At the gloomy little window, which was turning blue, we
      could distinctly see both banks of the Donets River and the oak copse
      beyond the river. It was time to sleep.
    

      “It will be very interesting here to-morrow,” said my
      companion when I put out the candle and went to bed. “After early
      mass, the procession will go in boats from the Monastery to the Hermitage.”
    

      Raising his right eyebrow and putting his head on one side, he prayed
      before the ikons, and, without undressing, lay down on his little sofa.
    

      “Yes,” he said, turning over on the other side.
    

      “Why yes?” I asked.
    

      “When I accepted orthodoxy in Novotcherkassk my mother was looking
      for me in Rostov. She felt that I meant to change my religion,” he
      sighed, and went on: “It is six years since I was there in the
      province of Mogilev. My sister must be married by now.”
    

      After a short silence, seeing that I was still awake, he began talking
      quietly of how they soon, thank God, would give him a job, and that at
      last he would have a home of his own, a settled position, his daily bread
      secure. . . . And I was thinking that this man would never have a home of
      his own, nor a settled position, nor his daily bread secure. He dreamed
      aloud of a village school as of the Promised Land; like the majority of
      people, he had a prejudice against a wandering life, and regarded it as
      something exceptional, abnormal and accidental, like an illness, and was
      looking for salvation in ordinary workaday life. The tone of his voice
      betrayed that he was conscious of his abnormal position and regretted it.
      He seemed as it were apologizing and justifying himself.
    

      Not more than a yard from me lay a homeless wanderer; in the rooms of the
      hostels and by the carts in the courtyard among the pilgrims some hundreds
      of such homeless wanderers were waiting for the morning, and further away,
      if one could picture to oneself the whole of Russia, a vast multitude of
      such uprooted creatures was pacing at that moment along highroads and
      side-tracks, seeking something better, or were waiting for the dawn,
      asleep in wayside inns and little taverns, or on the grass under the open
      sky. . . . As I fell asleep I imagined how amazed and perhaps even
      overjoyed all these people would have been if reasoning and words could be
      found to prove to them that their life was as little in need of
      justification as any other. In my sleep I heard a bell ring outside as
      plaintively as though shedding bitter tears, and the lay brother calling
      out several times:
    

      “Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy upon us! Come to mass!”
    

      When I woke up my companion was not in the room. It was sunny and there
      was a murmur of the crowds through the window. Going out, I learned that
      mass was over and that the procession had set off for the Hermitage some
      time before. The people were wandering in crowds upon the river bank and,
      feeling at liberty, did not know what to do with themselves: they could
      not eat or drink, as the late mass was not yet over at the Hermitage; the
      Monastery shops where pilgrims are so fond of crowding and asking prices
      were still shut. In spite of their exhaustion, many of them from sheer
      boredom were trudging to the Hermitage. The path from the Monastery to the
      Hermitage, towards which I directed my steps, twined like a snake along
      the high steep bank, going up and down and threading in and out among the
      oaks and pines. Below, the Donets gleamed, reflecting the sun; above, the
      rugged chalk cliff stood up white with bright green on the top from the
      young foliage of oaks and pines, which, hanging one above another, managed
      somehow to grow on the vertical cliff without falling. The pilgrims
      trailed along the path in single file, one behind another. The majority of
      them were Little Russians from the neighbouring districts, but there were
      many from a distance, too, who had come on foot from the provinces of
      Kursk and Orel; in the long string of varied colours there were Greek
      settlers, too, from Mariupol, strongly built, sedate and friendly people,
      utterly unlike their weakly and degenerate compatriots who fill our
      southern seaside towns. There were men from the Donets, too, with red
      stripes on their breeches, and emigrants from the Tavritchesky province.
      There were a good many pilgrims of a nondescript class, like my Alexandr
      Ivanitch; what sort of people they were and where they came from it was
      impossible to tell from their faces, from their clothes, or from their
      speech. The path ended at the little landing-stage, from which a narrow
      road went to the left to the Hermitage, cutting its way through the
      mountain. At the landing-stage stood two heavy big boats of a forbidding
      aspect, like the New Zealand pirogues which one may see in the works of
      Jules Verne. One boat with rugs on the seats was destined for the clergy
      and the singers, the other without rugs for the public. When the
      procession was returning I found myself among the elect who had succeeded
      in squeezing themselves into the second. There were so many of the elect
      that the boat scarcely moved, and one had to stand all the way without
      stirring and to be careful that one’s hat was not crushed. The route
      was lovely. Both banks—one high, steep and white, with overhanging
      pines and oaks, with the crowds hurrying back along the path, and the
      other shelving, with green meadows and an oak copse bathed in sunshine—looked
      as happy and rapturous as though the May morning owed its charm only to
      them. The reflection of the sun in the rapidly flowing Donets quivered and
      raced away in all directions, and its long rays played on the chasubles,
      on the banners and on the drops splashed up by the oars. The singing of
      the Easter hymns, the ringing of the bells, the splash of the oars in the
      water, the calls of the birds, all mingled in the air into something
      tender and harmonious. The boat with the priests and the banners led the
      way; at its helm the black figure of a lay brother stood motionless as a
      statue.
    

      When the procession was getting near the Monastery, I noticed Alexandr
      Ivanitch among the elect. He was standing in front of them all, and, his
      mouth wide open with pleasure and his right eyebrow cocked up, was gazing
      at the procession. His face was beaming; probably at such moments, when
      there were so many people round him and it was so bright, he was satisfied
      with himself, his new religion, and his conscience.
    

      When a little later we were sitting in our room, drinking tea, he still
      beamed with satisfaction; his face showed that he was satisfied both with
      the tea and with me, that he fully appreciated my being an intellectual,
      but that he would know how to play his part with credit if any
      intellectual topic turned up. . . .
    

      “Tell me, what psychology ought I to read?” he began an
      intellectual conversation, wrinkling up his nose.
    

      “Why, what do you want it for?”
    

      “One cannot be a teacher without a knowledge of psychology. Before
      teaching a boy I ought to understand his soul.”
    

      I told him that psychology alone would not be enough to make one
      understand a boy’s soul, and moreover psychology for a teacher who
      had not yet mastered the technical methods of instruction in reading,
      writing, and arithmetic would be a luxury as superfluous as the higher
      mathematics. He readily agreed with me, and began describing how hard and
      responsible was the task of a teacher, how hard it was to eradicate in the
      boy the habitual tendency to evil and superstition, to make him think
      honestly and independently, to instil into him true religion, the ideas of
      personal dignity, of freedom, and so on. In answer to this I said
      something to him. He agreed again. He agreed very readily, in fact.
      Obviously his brain had not a very firm grasp of all these “intellectual
      subjects.”
    

      Up to the time of my departure we strolled together about the Monastery,
      whiling away the long hot day. He never left my side a minute; whether he
      had taken a fancy to me or was afraid of solitude, God only knows! I
      remember we sat together under a clump of yellow acacia in one of the
      little gardens that are scattered on the mountain side.
    

      “I am leaving here in a fortnight,” he said; “it is high
      time.”
    

      “Are you going on foot?”
    

      “From here to Slavyansk I shall walk, then by railway to Nikitovka;
      from Nikitovka the Donets line branches off, and along that branch line I
      shall walk as far as Hatsepetovka, and there a railway guard, I know, will
      help me on my way.”
    

      I thought of the bare, deserted steppe between Nikitovka and Hatsepetovka,
      and pictured to myself Alexandr Ivanitch striding along it, with his
      doubts, his homesickness, and his fear of solitude . . . . He read boredom
      in my face, and sighed.
    

      “And my sister must be married by now,” he said, thinking
      aloud, and at once, to shake off melancholy thoughts, pointed to the top
      of the rock and said:
    

      “From that mountain one can see Izyum.”
    

      As we were walking up the mountain he had a little misfortune. I suppose
      he stumbled, for he slit his cotton trousers and tore the sole of his
      shoe.
    

      “Tss!” he said, frowning as he took off a shoe and exposed a
      bare foot without a stocking. “How unpleasant! . . . That’s a
      complication, you know, which . . . Yes!”
    

      Turning the shoe over and over before his eyes, as though unable to
      believe that the sole was ruined for ever, he spent a long time frowning,
      sighing, and clicking with his tongue.
    

      I had in my trunk a pair of boots, old but fashionable, with pointed toes
      and laces. I had brought them with me in case of need, and only wore them
      in wet weather. When we got back to our room I made up a phrase as
      diplomatic as I could and offered him these boots. He accepted them and
      said with dignity:
    

      “I should thank you, but I know that you consider thanks a
      convention.”
    

      He was pleased as a child with the pointed toes and the laces, and even
      changed his plans.
    

      “Now I shall go to Novotcherkassk in a week, and not in a fortnight,”
      he said, thinking aloud. “In shoes like these I shall not be ashamed
      to show myself to my godfather. I was not going away from here just
      because I hadn’t any decent clothes. . . .”
    

      When the coachman was carrying out my trunk, a lay brother with a good
      ironical face came in to sweep out the room. Alexandr Ivanitch seemed
      flustered and embarrassed and asked him timidly:
    

      “Am I to stay here or go somewhere else?”
    

      He could not make up his mind to occupy a whole room to himself, and
      evidently by now was feeling ashamed of living at the expense of the
      Monastery. He was very reluctant to part from me; to put off being lonely
      as long as possible, he asked leave to see me on my way.
    

      The road from the Monastery, which had been excavated at the cost of no
      little labour in the chalk mountain, moved upwards, going almost like a
      spiral round the mountain, over roots and under sullen overhanging pines.
      . . .
    

      The Donets was the first to vanish from our sight, after it the Monastery
      yard with its thousands of people, and then the green roofs. . . . Since I
      was mounting upwards everything seemed vanishing into a pit. The cross on
      the church, burnished by the rays of the setting sun, gleamed brightly in
      the abyss and vanished. Nothing was left but the oaks, the pines, and the
      white road. But then our carriage came out on a level country, and that
      was all left below and behind us. Alexandr Ivanitch jumped out and,
      smiling mournfully, glanced at me for the last time with his childish
      eyes, and vanished from me for ever. . . .
    

      The impressions of the Holy Mountains had already become memories, and I
      saw something new: the level plain, the whitish-brown distance, the way
      side copse, and beyond it a windmill which stood with out moving, and
      seemed bored at not being allowed to wave its sails because it was a
      holiday.
    











      THE STEPPE
    

The Story of a Journey


      I
    

EARLY one morning
      in July a shabby covered chaise, one of those antediluvian chaises without
      springs in which no one travels in Russia nowadays, except merchant’s
      clerks, dealers and the less well-to-do among priests, drove out of N.,
      the principal town of the province of Z., and rumbled noisily along the
      posting-track. It rattled and creaked at every movement; the pail, hanging
      on behind, chimed in gruffly, and from these sounds alone and from the
      wretched rags of leather hanging loose about its peeling body one could
      judge of its decrepit age and readiness to drop to pieces.
    

      Two of the inhabitants of N. were sitting in the chaise; they were a
      merchant of N. called Ivan Ivanitch Kuzmitchov, a man with a shaven face
      wearing glasses and a straw hat, more like a government clerk than a
      merchant, and Father Christopher Sireysky, the priest of the Church of St.
      Nikolay at N., a little old man with long hair, in a grey canvas cassock,
      a wide-brimmed top-hat and a coloured embroidered girdle. The former was
      absorbed in thought, and kept tossing his head to shake off drowsiness; in
      his countenance an habitual business-like reserve was struggling with the
      genial expression of a man who has just said good-bye to his relatives and
      has had a good drink at parting. The latter gazed with moist eyes
      wonderingly at God’s world, and his smile was so broad that it
      seemed to embrace even the brim of his hat; his face was red and looked
      frozen. Both of them, Father Christopher as well as Kuzmitchov, were going
      to sell wool. At parting with their families they had just eaten heartily
      of pastry puffs and cream, and although it was so early in the morning had
      had a glass or two. . . . Both were in the best of humours.
    

      Apart from the two persons described above and the coachman Deniska, who
      lashed the pair of frisky bay horses, there was another figure in the
      chaise—a boy of nine with a sunburnt face, wet with tears. This was
      Yegorushka, Kuzmitchov’s nephew. With the sanction of his uncle and
      the blessing of Father Christopher, he was now on his way to go to school.
      His mother, Olga Ivanovna, the widow of a collegiate secretary, and
      Kuzmitchov’s sister, who was fond of educated people and refined
      society, had entreated her brother to take Yegorushka with him when he
      went to sell wool and to put him to school; and now the boy was sitting on
      the box beside the coachman Deniska, holding on to his elbow to keep from
      falling off, and dancing up and down like a kettle on the hob, with no
      notion where he was going or what he was going for. The rapid motion
      through the air blew out his red shirt like a balloon on his back and made
      his new hat with a peacock’s feather in it, like a coachman’s,
      keep slipping on to the back of his head. He felt himself an intensely
      unfortunate person, and had an inclination to cry.
    

      When the chaise drove past the prison, Yegorushka glanced at the sentinels
      pacing slowly by the high white walls, at the little barred windows, at
      the cross shining on the roof, and remembered how the week before, on the
      day of the Holy Mother of Kazan, he had been with his mother to the prison
      church for the Dedication Feast, and how before that, at Easter, he had
      gone to the prison with Deniska and Ludmila the cook, and had taken the
      prisoners Easter bread, eggs, cakes and roast beef. The prisoners had
      thanked them and made the sign of the cross, and one of them had given
      Yegorushka a pewter buckle of his own making.
    

      The boy gazed at the familiar places, while the hateful chaise flew by and
      left them all behind. After the prison he caught glimpses of black grimy
      foundries, followed by the snug green cemetery surrounded by a wall of
      cobblestones; white crosses and tombstones, nestling among green
      cherry-trees and looking in the distance like patches of white, peeped out
      gaily from behind the wall. Yegorushka remembered that when the cherries
      were in blossom those white patches melted with the flowers into a sea of
      white; and that when the cherries were ripe the white tombstones and
      crosses were dotted with splashes of red like bloodstains. Under the
      cherry trees in the cemetery Yegorushka’s father and granny, Zinaida
      Danilovna, lay sleeping day and night. When Granny had died she had been
      put in a long narrow coffin and two pennies had been put upon her eyes,
      which would not keep shut. Up to the time of her death she had been brisk,
      and used to bring soft rolls covered with poppy seeds from the market. Now
      she did nothing but sleep and sleep. . . .
    

      Beyond the cemetery came the smoking brickyards. From under the long roofs
      of reeds that looked as though pressed flat to the ground, a thick black
      smoke rose in great clouds and floated lazily upwards. The sky was murky
      above the brickyards and the cemetery, and great shadows from the clouds
      of smoke crept over the fields and across the roads. Men and horses
      covered with red dust were moving about in the smoke near the roofs.
    

      The town ended with the brickyards and the open country began. Yegorushka
      looked at the town for the last time, pressed his face against Deniska’s
      elbow, and wept bitterly.
    

      “Come, not done howling yet, cry-baby!” cried Kuzmitchov.
      “You are blubbering again, little milksop! If you don’t want
      to go, stay behind; no one is taking you by force!
    

      “Never mind, never mind, Yegor boy, never mind,” Father
      Christopher muttered rapidly—“never mind, my boy. . . . Call
      upon God. . . . You are not going for your harm, but for your good.
      Learning is light, as the saying is, and ignorance is darkness. . . . That
      is so, truly.”
    

      “Do you want to go back?” asked Kuzmitchov.
    

      “Yes, . . . yes, . . .” answered Yegorushka, sobbing.
    

      “Well, you’d better go back then. Anyway, you are going for
      nothing; it’s a day’s journey for a spoonful of porridge.”
    

      “Never mind, never mind, my boy,” Father Christopher went on.
      “Call upon God. . . . Lomonosov set off with the fishermen in the
      same way, and he became a man famous all over Europe. Learning in
      conjunction with faith brings forth fruit pleasing to God. What are the
      words of the prayer? For the glory of our Maker, for the comfort of our
      parents, for the benefit of our Church and our country. . . . Yes, indeed!”
    

      “The benefit is not the same in all cases,” said Kuzmitchov,
      lighting a cheap cigar; “some will study twenty years and get no
      sense from it.”
    

      “That does happen.”
    

      “Learning is a benefit to some, but others only muddle their brains.
      My sister is a woman who does not understand; she is set upon refinement,
      and wants to turn Yegorka into a learned man, and she does not understand
      that with my business I could settle Yegorka happily for the rest of his
      life. I tell you this, that if everyone were to go in for being learned
      and refined there would be no one to sow the corn and do the trading; they
      would all die of hunger.”
    

      “And if all go in for trading and sowing corn there will be no one
      to acquire learning.”
    

      And considering that each of them had said something weighty and
      convincing, Kuzmitchov and Father Christopher both looked serious and
      cleared their throats simultaneously.
    

      Deniska, who had been listening to their conversation without
      understanding a word of it, shook his head and, rising in his seat, lashed
      at both the bays. A silence followed.
    

      Meanwhile a wide boundless plain encircled by a chain of low hills lay
      stretched before the travellers’ eyes. Huddling together and peeping
      out from behind one another, these hills melted together into rising
      ground, which stretched right to the very horizon and disappeared into the
      lilac distance; one drives on and on and cannot discern where it begins or
      where it ends. . . . The sun had already peeped out from beyond the town
      behind them, and quietly, without fuss, set to its accustomed task. At
      first in the distance before them a broad, bright, yellow streak of light
      crept over the ground where the earth met the sky, near the little barrows
      and the windmills, which in the distance looked like tiny men waving their
      arms. A minute later a similar streak gleamed a little nearer, crept to
      the right and embraced the hills. Something warm touched Yegorushka’s
      spine; the streak of light, stealing up from behind, darted between the
      chaise and the horses, moved to meet the other streak, and soon the whole
      wide steppe flung off the twilight of early morning, and was smiling and
      sparkling with dew.
    

      The cut rye, the coarse steppe grass, the milkwort, the wild hemp, all
      withered from the sultry heat, turned brown and half dead, now washed by
      the dew and caressed by the sun, revived, to fade again. Arctic petrels
      flew across the road with joyful cries; marmots called to one another in
      the grass. Somewhere, far away to the left, lapwings uttered their
      plaintive notes. A covey of partridges, scared by the chaise, fluttered up
      and with their soft “trrrr!” flew off to the hills. In the
      grass crickets, locusts and grasshoppers kept up their churring,
      monotonous music.
    

      But a little time passed, the dew evaporated, the air grew stagnant, and
      the disillusioned steppe began to wear its jaded July aspect. The grass
      drooped, everything living was hushed. The sun-baked hills, brownish-green
      and lilac in the distance, with their quiet shadowy tones, the plain with
      the misty distance and, arched above them, the sky, which seems terribly
      deep and transparent in the steppes, where there are no woods or high
      hills, seemed now endless, petrified with dreariness. . . .
    

      How stifling and oppressive it was! The chaise raced along, while
      Yegorushka saw always the same—the sky, the plain, the low hills . .
      . . The music in the grass was hushed, the petrels had flown away, the
      partridges were out of sight, rooks hovered idly over the withered grass;
      they were all alike and made the steppe even more monotonous.
    

      A hawk flew just above the ground, with an even sweep of its wings,
      suddenly halted in the air as though pondering on the dreariness of life,
      then fluttered its wings and flew like an arrow over the steppe, and there
      was no telling why it flew off and what it wanted. In the distance a
      windmill waved its sails. . . .
    

      Now and then a glimpse of a white potsherd or a heap of stones broke the
      monotony; a grey stone stood out for an instant or a parched willow with a
      blue crow on its top branch; a marmot would run across the road and—again
      there flitted before the eyes only the high grass, the low hills, the
      rooks. . . .
    

      But at last, thank God, a waggon loaded with sheaves came to meet them; a
      peasant wench was lying on the very top. Sleepy, exhausted by the heat,
      she lifted her head and looked at the travellers. Deniska gaped, looking
      at her; the horses stretched out their noses towards the sheaves; the
      chaise, squeaking, kissed the waggon, and the pointed ears passed over
      Father Christopher’s hat like a brush.
    

      “You are driving over folks, fatty!” cried Deniska. “What
      a swollen lump of a face, as though a bumble-bee had stung it!”
    

      The girl smiled drowsily, and moving her lips lay down again; then a
      solitary poplar came into sight on the low hill. Someone had planted it,
      and God only knows why it was there. It was hard to tear the eyes away
      from its graceful figure and green drapery. Was that lovely creature
      happy? Sultry heat in summer, in winter frost and snowstorms, terrible
      nights in autumn when nothing is to be seen but darkness and nothing is to
      be heard but the senseless angry howling wind, and, worst of all, alone,
      alone for the whole of life . . . . Beyond the poplar stretches of wheat
      extended like a bright yellow carpet from the road to the top of the
      hills. On the hills the corn was already cut and laid up in sheaves, while
      at the bottom they were still cutting. . . . Six mowers were standing in a
      row swinging their scythes, and the scythes gleamed gaily and uttered in
      unison together “Vzhee, vzhee!” From the movements of the
      peasant women binding the sheaves, from the faces of the mowers, from the
      glitter of the scythes, it could be seen that the sultry heat was baking
      and stifling. A black dog with its tongue hanging out ran from the mowers
      to meet the chaise, probably with the intention of barking, but stopped
      halfway and stared indifferently at Deniska, who shook his whip at him; it
      was too hot to bark! One peasant woman got up and, putting both hands to
      her aching back, followed Yegorushka’s red shirt with her eyes.
      Whether it was that the colour pleased her or that he reminded her of her
      children, she stood a long time motionless staring after him.
    

      But now the wheat, too, had flashed by; again the parched plain, the
      sunburnt hills, the sultry sky stretched before them; again a hawk hovered
      over the earth. In the distance, as before, a windmill whirled its sails,
      and still it looked like a little man waving his arms. It was wearisome to
      watch, and it seemed as though one would never reach it, as though it were
      running away from the chaise.
    

      Father Christopher and Kuzmitchov were silent. Deniska lashed the horses
      and kept shouting to them, while Yegorushka had left off crying, and gazed
      about him listlessly. The heat and the tedium of the steppes overpowered
      him. He felt as though he had been travelling and jolting up and down for
      a very long time, that the sun had been baking his back a long time.
      Before they had gone eight miles he began to feel “It must be time
      to rest.” The geniality gradually faded out of his uncle’s
      face and nothing else was left but the air of business reserve; and to a
      gaunt shaven face, especially when it is adorned with spectacles and the
      nose and temples are covered with dust, this reserve gives a relentless,
      inquisitorial appearance. Father Christopher never left off gazing with
      wonder at God’s world, and smiling. Without speaking, he brooded
      over something pleasant and nice, and a kindly, genial smile remained
      imprinted on his face. It seemed as though some nice and pleasant thought
      were imprinted on his brain by the heat.
    

      “Well, Deniska, shall we overtake the waggons to-day?” asked
      Kuzmitchov.
    

      Deniska looked at the sky, rose in his seat, lashed at his horses and then
      answered:
    

      “By nightfall, please God, we shall overtake them.”
    

      There was a sound of dogs barking. Half a dozen steppe sheep-dogs,
      suddenly leaping out as though from ambush, with ferocious howling barks,
      flew to meet the chaise. All of them, extraordinarily furious, surrounded
      the chaise, with their shaggy spider-like muzzles and their eyes red with
      anger, and jostling against one another in their anger, raised a hoarse
      howl. They were filled with passionate hatred of the horses, of the
      chaise, and of the human beings, and seemed ready to tear them into
      pieces. Deniska, who was fond of teasing and beating, was delighted at the
      chance of it, and with a malignant expression bent over and lashed at the
      sheep-dogs with his whip. The brutes growled more than ever, the horses
      flew on; and Yegorushka, who had difficulty in keeping his seat on the
      box, realized, looking at the dogs’ eyes and teeth, that if he fell
      down they would instantly tear him to bits; but he felt no fear and looked
      at them as malignantly as Deniska, and regretted that he had no whip in
      his hand.
    

      The chaise came upon a flock of sheep.
    

      “Stop!” cried Kuzmitchov. “Pull up! Woa!”
    

      Deniska threw his whole body backwards and pulled up the horses.
    

      “Come here!” Kuzmitchov shouted to the shepherd. “Call
      off the dogs, curse them!”
    

      The old shepherd, tattered and barefoot, wearing a fur cap, with a dirty
      sack round his loins and a long crook in his hand—a regular figure
      from the Old Testament—called off the dogs, and taking off his cap,
      went up to the chaise. Another similar Old Testament figure was standing
      motionless at the other end of the flock, staring without interest at the
      travellers.
    

      “Whose sheep are these?” asked Kuzmitchov.
    

      “Varlamov’s,” the old man answered in a loud voice.
    

      “Varlamov’s,” repeated the shepherd standing at the
      other end of the flock.
    

      “Did Varlamov come this way yesterday or not?”
    

      “He did not; his clerk came. . . .”
    

      “Drive on!”
    

      The chaise rolled on and the shepherds, with their angry dogs, were left
      behind. Yegorushka gazed listlessly at the lilac distance in front, and it
      began to seem as though the windmill, waving its sails, were getting
      nearer. It became bigger and bigger, grew quite large, and now he could
      distinguish clearly its two sails. One sail was old and patched, the other
      had only lately been made of new wood and glistened in the sun. The chaise
      drove straight on, while the windmill, for some reason, began retreating
      to the left. They drove on and on, and the windmill kept moving away to
      the left, and still did not disappear.
    

      “A fine windmill Boltva has put up for his son,” observed
      Deniska.
    

      “And how is it we don’t see his farm?”
    

      “It is that way, beyond the creek.”
    

      Boltva’s farm, too, soon came into sight, but yet the windmill did
      not retreat, did not drop behind; it still watched Yegorushka with its
      shining sail and waved. What a sorcerer!
    

      II
    

      Towards midday the chaise turned off the road to the right; it went on a
      little way at walking pace and then stopped. Yegorushka heard a soft, very
      caressing gurgle, and felt a different air breathe on his face with a cool
      velvety touch. Through a little pipe of hemlock stuck there by some
      unknown benefactor, water was running in a thin trickle from a low hill,
      put together by nature of huge monstrous stones. It fell to the ground,
      and limpid, sparkling gaily in the sun, and softly murmuring as though
      fancying itself a great tempestuous torrent, flowed swiftly away to the
      left. Not far from its source the little stream spread itself out into a
      pool; the burning sunbeams and the parched soil greedily drank it up and
      sucked away its strength; but a little further on it must have mingled
      with another rivulet, for a hundred paces away thick reeds showed green
      and luxuriant along its course, and three snipe flew up from them with a
      loud cry as the chaise drove by.
    

      The travellers got out to rest by the stream and feed the horses.
      Kuzmitchov, Father Christopher and Yegorushka sat down on a mat in the
      narrow strip of shade cast by the chaise and the unharnessed horses. The
      nice pleasant thought that the heat had imprinted in Father Christopher’s
      brain craved expression after he had had a drink of water and eaten a
      hard-boiled egg. He bent a friendly look upon Yegorushka, munched, and
      began:
    

      “I studied too, my boy; from the earliest age God instilled into me
      good sense and understanding, so that while I was just such a lad as you I
      was beyond others, a comfort to my parents and preceptors by my good
      sense. Before I was fifteen I could speak and make verses in Latin, just
      as in Russian. I was the crosier-bearer to his Holiness Bishop
      Christopher. After mass one day, as I remember it was the patron saint’s
      day of His Majesty Tsar Alexandr Pavlovitch of blessed memory, he unrobed
      at the altar, looked kindly at me and asked, ‘Puer bone, quam
      appelaris?’ And I answered, ‘Christopherus sum;’ and he
      said, ‘Ergo connominati sumus’—that is, that we were
      namesakes. . . Then he asked in Latin, ‘Whose son are you?’ To
      which I answered, also in Latin, that I was the son of deacon Sireysky of
      the village of Lebedinskoe. Seeing my readiness and the clearness of my
      answers, his Holiness blessed me and said, ‘Write to your father
      that I will not forget him, and that I will keep you in view.’ The
      holy priests and fathers who were standing round the altar, hearing our
      discussion in Latin, were not a little surprised, and everyone expressed
      his pleasure in praise of me. Before I had moustaches, my boy, I could
      read Latin, Greek, and French; I knew philosophy, mathematics, secular
      history, and all the sciences. The Lord gave me a marvellous memory.
      Sometimes, if I read a thing once or twice, I knew it by heart. My
      preceptors and patrons were amazed, and so they expected I should make a
      learned man, a luminary of the Church. I did think of going to Kiev to
      continue my studies, but my parents did not approve. ‘You’ll
      be studying all your life,’ said my father; ‘when shall we see
      you finished?’ Hearing such words, I gave up study and took a post.
      . . . Of course, I did not become a learned man, but then I did not
      disobey my parents; I was a comfort to them in their old age and gave them
      a creditable funeral. Obedience is more than fasting and prayer.
    

      “I suppose you have forgotten all your learning?” observed
      Kuzmitchov.
    

      “I should think so! Thank God, I have reached my eightieth year!
      Something of philosophy and rhetoric I do remember, but languages and
      mathematics I have quite forgotten.”
    

      Father Christopher screwed up his eyes, thought a minute and said in an
      undertone:
    

      “What is a substance? A creature is a self-existing object, not
      requiring anything else for its completion.”
    

      He shook his head and laughed with feeling.
    

      “Spiritual nourishment!” he said. “Of a truth matter
      nourishes the flesh and spiritual nourishment the soul!”
    

      “Learning is all very well,” sighed Kuzmitchov, “but if
      we don’t overtake Varlamov, learning won’t do much for us.”
    

      “A man isn’t a needle—we shall find him. He must be
      going his rounds in these parts.”
    

      Among the sedge were flying the three snipe they had seen before, and in
      their plaintive cries there was a note of alarm and vexation at having
      been driven away from the stream. The horses were steadily munching and
      snorting. Deniska walked about by them and, trying to appear indifferent
      to the cucumbers, pies, and eggs that the gentry were eating, he
      concentrated himself on the gadflies and horseflies that were fastening
      upon the horses’ backs and bellies; he squashed his victims
      apathetically, emitting a peculiar, fiendishly triumphant, guttural sound,
      and when he missed them cleared his throat with an air of vexation and
      looked after every lucky one that escaped death.
    

      “Deniska, where are you? Come and eat,” said Kuzmitchov,
      heaving a deep sigh, a sign that he had had enough.
    

      Deniska diffidently approached the mat and picked out five thick and
      yellow cucumbers (he did not venture to take the smaller and fresher
      ones), took two hard-boiled eggs that looked dark and were cracked, then
      irresolutely, as though afraid he might get a blow on his outstretched
      hand, touched a pie with his finger.
    

      “Take them, take them,” Kuzmitchov urged him on.
    

      Deniska took the pies resolutely, and, moving some distance away, sat down
      on the grass with his back to the chaise. At once there was such a sound
      of loud munching that even the horses turned round to look suspiciously at
      Deniska.
    

      After his meal Kuzmitchov took a sack containing something out of the
      chaise and said to Yegorushka:
    

      “I am going to sleep, and you mind that no one takes the sack from
      under my head.”
    

      Father Christopher took off his cassock, his girdle, and his full coat,
      and Yegorushka, looking at him, was dumb with astonishment. He had never
      imagined that priests wore trousers, and Father Christopher had on real
      canvas trousers thrust into high boots, and a short striped jacket.
      Looking at him, Yegorushka thought that in this costume, so unsuitable to
      his dignified position, he looked with his long hair and beard very much
      like Robinson Crusoe. After taking off their outer garments Kuzmitchov and
      Father Christopher lay down in the shade under the chaise, facing one
      another, and closed their eyes. Deniska, who had finished munching,
      stretched himself out on his back and also closed his eyes.
    

      “You look out that no one takes away the horses!” he said to
      Yegorushka, and at once fell asleep.
    

      Stillness reigned. There was no sound except the munching and snorting of
      the horses and the snoring of the sleepers; somewhere far away a lapwing
      wailed, and from time to time there sounded the shrill cries of the three
      snipe who had flown up to see whether their uninvited visitors had gone
      away; the rivulet babbled, lisping softly, but all these sounds did not
      break the stillness, did not stir the stagnation, but, on the contrary,
      lulled all nature to slumber.
    

      Yegorushka, gasping with the heat, which was particularly oppressive after
      a meal, ran to the sedge and from there surveyed the country. He saw
      exactly the same as he had in the morning: the plain, the low hills, the
      sky, the lilac distance; only the hills stood nearer; and he could not see
      the windmill, which had been left far behind. From behind the rocky hill
      from which the stream flowed rose another, smoother and broader; a little
      hamlet of five or six homesteads clung to it. No people, no trees, no
      shade were to be seen about the huts; it looked as though the hamlet had
      expired in the burning air and was dried up. To while away the time
      Yegorushka caught a grasshopper in the grass, held it in his closed hand
      to his ear, and spent a long time listening to the creature playing on its
      instrument. When he was weary of its music he ran after a flock of yellow
      butterflies who were flying towards the sedge on the watercourse, and
      found himself again beside the chaise, without noticing how he came there.
      His uncle and Father Christopher were sound asleep; their sleep would be
      sure to last two or three hours till the horses had rested. . . . How was
      he to get through that long time, and where was he to get away from the
      heat? A hard problem. . . . Mechanically Yegorushka put his lips to the
      trickle that ran from the waterpipe; there was a chilliness in his mouth
      and there was the smell of hemlock. He drank at first eagerly, then went
      on with effort till the sharp cold had run from his mouth all over his
      body and the water was spilt on his shirt. Then he went up to the chaise
      and began looking at the sleeping figures. His uncle’s face wore, as
      before, an expression of business-like reserve. Fanatically devoted to his
      work, Kuzmitchov always, even in his sleep and at church when they were
      singing, “Like the cherubim,” thought about his business and
      could never forget it for a moment; and now he was probably dreaming about
      bales of wool, waggons, prices, Varlamov. . . . Father Christopher, now, a
      soft, frivolous and absurd person, had never all his life been conscious
      of anything which could, like a boa-constrictor, coil about his soul and
      hold it tight. In all the numerous enterprises he had undertaken in his
      day what attracted him was not so much the business itself, but the bustle
      and the contact with other people involved in every undertaking. Thus, in
      the present expedition, he was not so much interested in wool, in
      Varlamov, and in prices, as in the long journey, the conversations on the
      way, the sleeping under a chaise, and the meals at odd times. . . . And
      now, judging from his face, he must have been dreaming of Bishop
      Christopher, of the Latin discussion, of his wife, of puffs and cream and
      all sorts of things that Kuzmitchov could not possibly dream of.
    

      While Yegorushka was watching their sleeping faces he suddenly heard a
      soft singing; somewhere at a distance a woman was singing, and it was
      difficult to tell where and in what direction. The song was subdued,
      dreary and melancholy, like a dirge, and hardly audible, and seemed to
      come first from the right, then from the left, then from above, and then
      from underground, as though an unseen spirit were hovering over the steppe
      and singing. Yegorushka looked about him, and could not make out where the
      strange song came from. Then as he listened he began to fancy that the
      grass was singing; in its song, withered and half-dead, it was without
      words, but plaintively and passionately, urging that it was not to blame,
      that the sun was burning it for no fault of its own; it urged that it
      ardently longed to live, that it was young and might have been beautiful
      but for the heat and the drought; it was guiltless, but yet it prayed
      forgiveness and protested that it was in anguish, sad and sorry for
      itself. . . .
    

      Yegorushka listened for a little, and it began to seem as though this
      dreary, mournful song made the air hotter, more suffocating and more
      stagnant. . . . To drown the singing he ran to the sedge, humming to
      himself and trying to make a noise with his feet. From there he looked
      about in all directions and found out who was singing. Near the furthest
      hut in the hamlet stood a peasant woman in a short petticoat, with long
      thin legs like a heron. She was sowing something. A white dust floated
      languidly from her sieve down the hillock. Now it was evident that she was
      singing. A couple of yards from her a little bare-headed boy in nothing
      but a smock was standing motionless. As though fascinated by the song, he
      stood stock-still, staring away into the distance, probably at Yegorushka’s
      crimson shirt.
    

      The song ceased. Yegorushka sauntered back to the chaise, and to while
      away the time went again to the trickle of water.
    

      And again there was the sound of the dreary song. It was the same
      long-legged peasant woman in the hamlet over the hill. Yegorushka’s
      boredom came back again. He left the pipe and looked upwards. What he saw
      was so unexpected that he was a little frightened. Just above his head on
      one of the big clumsy stones stood a chubby little boy, wearing nothing
      but a shirt, with a prominent stomach and thin legs, the same boy who had
      been standing before by the peasant woman. He was gazing with open mouth
      and unbElinking eyes at Yegorushka’s crimson shirt and at the
      chaise, with a look of blank astonishment and even fear, as though he saw
      before him creatures of another world. The red colour of the shirt charmed
      and allured him. But the chaise and the men sleeping under it excited his
      curiosity; perhaps he had not noticed how the agreeable red colour and
      curiosity had attracted him down from the hamlet, and now probably he was
      surprised at his own boldness. For a long while Yegorushka stared at him,
      and he at Yegorushka. Both were silent and conscious of some awkwardness.
      After a long silence Yegorushka asked:
    

      “What’s your name?”
    

      The stranger’s cheeks puffed out more than ever; he pressed his back
      against the rock, opened his eyes wide, moved his lips, and answered in a
      husky bass: “Tit!”
    

      The boys said not another word to each other; after a brief silence, still
      keeping his eyes fixed on Yegorushka, the mysterious Tit kicked up one
      leg, felt with his heel for a niche and clambered up the rock; from that
      point he ascended to the next rock, staggering backwards and looking
      intently at Yegorushka, as though afraid he might hit him from behind, and
      so made his way upwards till he disappeared altogether behind the crest of
      the hill.
    

      After watching him out of sight, Yegorushka put his arms round his knees
      and leaned his head on them. . . . The burning sun scorched the back of
      his head, his neck, and his spine. The melancholy song died away, then
      floated again on the stagnant stifling air. The rivulet gurgled
      monotonously, the horses munched, and time dragged on endlessly, as though
      it, too, were stagnant and had come to a standstill. It seemed as though a
      hundred years had passed since the morning. Could it be that God’s
      world, the chaise and the horses would come to a standstill in that air,
      and, like the hills, turn to stone and remain for ever in one spot?
      Yegorushka raised his head, and with smarting eyes looked before him; the
      lilac distance, which till then had been motionless, began heaving, and
      with the sky floated away into the distance. . . . It drew after it the
      brown grass, the sedge, and with extraordinary swiftness Yegorushka
      floated after the flying distance. Some force noiselessly drew him
      onwards, and the heat and the wearisome song flew after in pursuit.
      Yegorushka bent his head and shut his eyes. . . .
    

      Deniska was the first to wake up. Something must have bitten him, for he
      jumped up, quickly scratched his shoulder and said:
    

      “Plague take you, cursed idolater!”
    

      Then he went to the brook, had a drink and slowly washed. His splashing
      and puffing roused Yegorushka from his lethargy. The boy looked at his wet
      face with drops of water and big freckles which made it look like marble,
      and asked:
    

      “Shall we soon be going?”
    

      Deniska looked at the height of the sun and answered:
    

      “I expect so.”
    

      He dried himself with the tail of his shirt and, making a very serious
      face, hopped on one leg.
    

      “I say, which of us will get to the sedge first?” he said.
    

      Yegorushka was exhausted by the heat and drowsiness, but he raced off
      after him all the same. Deniska was in his twentieth year, was a coachman
      and going to be married, but he had not left off being a boy. He was very
      fond of flying kites, chasing pigeons, playing knuckle-bones, running
      races, and always took part in children’s games and disputes. No
      sooner had his master turned his back or gone to sleep than Deniska would
      begin doing something such as hopping on one leg or throwing stones. It
      was hard for any grown-up person, seeing the genuine enthusiasm with which
      he frolicked about in the society of children, to resist saying, “What
      a baby!” Children, on the other hand, saw nothing strange in the
      invasion of their domain by the big coachman. “Let him play,”
      they thought, “as long as he doesn’t fight!” In the same
      way little dogs see nothing strange in it when a simple-hearted big dog
      joins their company uninvited and begins playing with them.
    

      Deniska outstripped Yegorushka, and was evidently very much pleased at
      having done so. He winked at him, and to show that he could hop on one leg
      any distance, suggested to Yegorushka that he should hop with him along
      the road and from there, without resting, back to the chaise. Yegorushka
      declined this suggestion, for he was very much out of breath and
      exhausted.
    

      All at once Deniska looked very grave, as he did not look even when
      Kuzmitchov gave him a scolding or threatened him with a stick; listening
      intently, he dropped quietly on one knee and an expression of sternness
      and alarm came into his face, such as one sees in people who hear
      heretical talk. He fixed his eyes on one spot, raised his hand curved into
      a hollow, and suddenly fell on his stomach on the ground and slapped the
      hollow of his hand down upon the grass.
    

      “Caught!” he wheezed triumphantly, and, getting up, lifted a
      big grasshopper to Yegorushka’s eyes.
    

      The two boys stroked the grasshopper’s broad green back with their
      fingers and touched his antenna, supposing that this would please the
      creature. Then Deniska caught a fat fly that had been sucking blood and
      offered it to the grasshopper. The latter moved his huge jaws, that were
      like the visor of a helmet, with the utmost unconcern, as though he had
      been long acquainted with Deniska, and bit off the fly’s stomach.
      They let him go. With a flash of the pink lining of his wings, he flew
      down into the grass and at once began his churring notes again. They let
      the fly go, too. It preened its wings, and without its stomach flew off to
      the horses.
    

      A loud sigh was heard from under the chaise. It was Kuzmitchov waking up.
      He quickly raised his head, looked uneasily into the distance, and from
      that look, which passed by Yegorushka and Deniska without sympathy or
      interest, it could be seen that his thought on awaking was of the wool and
      of Varlamov.
    

      “Father Christopher, get up; it is time to start,” he said
      anxiously. “Wake up; we’ve slept too long as it is! Deniska,
      put the horses in.”
    

      Father Christopher woke up with the same smile with which he had fallen
      asleep; his face looked creased and wrinkled from sleep, and seemed only
      half the size. After washing and dressing, he proceeded without haste to
      take out of his pocket a little greasy psalter; and standing with his face
      towards the east, began in a whisper repeating the psalms of the day and
      crossing himself.
    

      “Father Christopher,” said Kuzmitchov reproachfully, “it’s
      time to start; the horses are ready, and here are you, . . . upon my word.”
    

      “In a minute, in a minute,” muttered Father Christopher.
      “I must read the psalms. . . . I haven’t read them to-day.”
    

      “The psalms can wait.”
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch, that is my rule every day. . . . I can’t . . .”
    

      “God will overlook it.”
    

      For a full quarter of an hour Father Christopher stood facing the east and
      moving his lips, while Kuzmitchov looked at him almost with hatred and
      impatiently shrugged his shoulders. He was particularly irritated when,
      after every “Hallelujah,” Father Christopher drew a long
      breath, rapidly crossed himself and repeated three times, intentionally
      raising his voice so that the others might cross themselves, “Hallelujah,
      hallelujah, hallelujah! Glory be to Thee, O Lord!” At last he
      smiled, looked upwards at the sky, and, putting the psalter in his pocket,
      said:
    

      “Finis!”
    

      A minute later the chaise had started on the road. As though it were going
      backwards and not forwards, the travellers saw the same scene as they had
      before midday.
    

      The low hills were still plunged in the lilac distance, and no end could
      be seen to them. There were glimpses of high grass and heaps of stones;
      strips of stubble land passed by them and still the same rooks, the same
      hawk, moving its wings with slow dignity, moved over the steppe. The air
      was more sultry than ever; from the sultry heat and the stillness
      submissive nature was spellbound into silence . . . . No wind, no fresh
      cheering sound, no cloud.
    

      But at last, when the sun was beginning to sink into the west, the steppe,
      the hills and the air could bear the oppression no longer, and, driven out
      of all patience, exhausted, tried to fling off the yoke. A fleecy
      ashen-grey cloud unexpectedly appeared behind the hills. It exchanged
      glances with the steppe, as though to say, “Here I am,” and
      frowned. Suddenly something burst in the stagnant air; there was a violent
      squall of wind which whirled round and round, roaring and whistling over
      the steppe. At once a murmur rose from the grass and last year’s dry
      herbage, the dust curled in spiral eddies over the road, raced over the
      steppe, and carrying with it straws, dragon flies and feathers, rose up in
      a whirling black column towards the sky and darkened the sun. Prickly
      uprooted plants ran stumbling and leaping in all directions over the
      steppe, and one of them got caught in the whirlwind, turned round and
      round like a bird, flew towards the sky, and turning into a little black
      speck, vanished from sight. After it flew another, and then a third, and
      Yegorushka saw two of them meet in the blue height and clutch at one
      another as though they were wrestling.
    

      A bustard flew up by the very road. Fluttering his wings and his tail, he
      looked, bathed in the sunshine, like an angler’s glittering tin fish
      or a waterfly flashing so swiftly over the water that its wings cannot be
      told from its antenna, which seem to be growing before, behind and on all
      sides. . . . Quivering in the air like an insect with a shimmer of bright
      colours, the bustard flew high up in a straight line, then, probably
      frightened by a cloud of dust, swerved to one side, and for a long time
      the gleam of his wings could be seen. . . .
    

      Then a corncrake flew up from the grass, alarmed by the hurricane and not
      knowing what was the matter. It flew with the wind and not against it,
      like all the other birds, so that all its feathers were ruffled up and it
      was puffed out to the size of a hen and looked very angry and impressive.
      Only the rooks who had grown old on the steppe and were accustomed to its
      vagaries hovered calmly over the grass, or taking no notice of anything,
      went on unconcernedly pecking with their stout beaks at the hard earth.
    

      There was a dull roll of thunder beyond the hills; there came a whiff of
      fresh air. Deniska gave a cheerful whistle and lashed his horses. Father
      Christopher and Kuzmitchov held their hats and looked intently towards the
      hills. . . . How pleasant a shower of rain would have been!
    

      One effort, one struggle more, and it seemed the steppe would have got the
      upper hand. But the unseen oppressive force gradually riveted its fetters
      on the wind and the air, laid the dust, and the stillness came back again
      as though nothing had happened, the cloud hid, the sun-baked hills frowned
      submissively, the air grew calm, and only somewhere the troubled lapwings
      wailed and lamented their destiny. . . .
    

      Soon after that the evening came on.
    

      III
    

      In the dusk of evening a big house of one storey, with a rusty iron roof
      and with dark windows, came into sight. This house was called a
      posting-inn, though it had nothing like a stableyard, and it stood in the
      middle of the steppe, with no kind of enclosure round it. A little to one
      side of it a wretched little cherry orchard shut in by a hurdle fence made
      a dark patch, and under the windows stood sleepy sunflowers drooping their
      heavy heads. From the orchard came the clatter of a little toy windmill,
      set there to frighten away hares by the rattle. Nothing more could be seen
      near the house, and nothing could be heard but the steppe. The chaise had
      scarcely stopped at the porch with an awning over it, when from the house
      there came the sound of cheerful voices, one a man’s, another a
      woman’s; there was the creak of a swing-door, and in a flash a tall
      gaunt figure, swinging its arms and fluttering its coat, was standing by
      the chaise. This was the innkeeper, Moisey Moisevitch, a man no longer
      young, with a very pale face and a handsome beard as black as charcoal. He
      was wearing a threadbare black coat, which hung flapping on his narrow
      shoulders as though on a hatstand, and fluttered its skirts like wings
      every time Moisey Moisevitch flung up his hands in delight or horror.
      Besides his coat the innkeeper was wearing full white trousers, not stuck
      into his boots, and a velvet waistcoat with brown flowers on it that
      looked like gigantic bugs.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch was at first dumb with excess of feeling on recognizing
      the travellers, then he clasped his hands and uttered a moan. His coat
      swung its skirts, his back bent into a bow, and his pale face twisted into
      a smile that suggested that to see the chaise was not merely a pleasure to
      him, but actually a joy so sweet as to be painful.
    

      “Oh dear! oh dear!” he began in a thin sing-song voice,
      breathless, fussing about and preventing the travellers from getting out
      of the chaise by his antics. “What a happy day for me! Oh, what am I
      to do now? Ivan Ivanitch! Father Christopher! What a pretty little
      gentleman sitting on the box, God strike me dead! Oh, my goodness! why am
      I standing here instead of asking the visitors indoors? Please walk in, I
      humbly beg you. . . . You are kindly welcome! Give me all your things. . .
      . Oh, my goodness me!”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch, who was rummaging in the chaise and assisting the
      travellers to alight, suddenly turned back and shouted in a voice as
      frantic and choking as though he were drowning and calling for help:
    

      “Solomon! Solomon!”
    

      “Solomon! Solomon!” a woman’s voice repeated indoors.
    

      The swing-door creaked, and in the doorway appeared a rather short young
      Jew with a big beak-like nose, with a bald patch surrounded by rough red
      curly hair; he was dressed in a short and very shabby reefer jacket, with
      rounded lappets and short sleeves, and in short serge trousers, so that he
      looked skimpy and short-tailed like an unfledged bird. This was Solomon,
      the brother of Moisey Moisevitch. He went up to the chaise, smiling rather
      queerly, and did not speak or greet the travellers.
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch and Father Christopher have come,” said Moisey
      Moisevitch in a tone as though he were afraid his brother would not
      believe him. “Dear, dear! What a surprise! Such honoured guests to
      have come us so suddenly! Come, take their things, Solomon. Walk in,
      honoured guests.”
    

      A little later Kuzmitchov, Father Christopher, and Yegorushka were sitting
      in a big gloomy empty room at an old oak table. The table was almost in
      solitude, for, except a wide sofa covered with torn American leather and
      three chairs, there was no other furniture in the room. And, indeed, not
      everybody would have given the chairs that name. They were a pitiful
      semblance of furniture, covered with American leather that had seen its
      best days, and with backs bent backwards at an unnaturally acute angle, so
      that they looked like children’s sledges. It was hard to imagine
      what had been the unknown carpenter’s object in bending the
      chairbacks so mercilessly, and one was tempted to imagine that it was not
      the carpenter’s fault, but that some athletic visitor had bent the
      chairs like this as a feat, then had tried to bend them back again and had
      made them worse. The room looked gloomy, the walls were grey, the ceilings
      and the cornices were grimy; on the floor were chinks and yawning holes
      that were hard to account for (one might have fancied they were made by
      the heel of the same athlete), and it seemed as though the room would
      still have been dark if a dozen lamps had hung in it. There was nothing
      approaching an ornament on the walls or the windows. On one wall, however,
      there hung a list of regulations of some sort under a two-headed eagle in
      a grey wooden frame, and on another wall in the same sort of frame an
      engraving with the inscription, “The Indifference of Man.”
      What it was to which men were indifferent it was impossible to make out,
      as the engraving was very dingy with age and was extensively flyblown.
      There was a smell of something decayed and sour in the room.
    

      As he led the visitors into the room, Moisey Moisevitch went on wriggling,
      gesticulating, shrugging and uttering joyful exclamations; he considered
      these antics necessary in order to seem polite and agreeable.
    

      “When did our waggons go by?” Kuzmitchov asked.
    

      “One party went by early this morning, and the other, Ivan Ivanitch,
      put up here for dinner and went on towards evening.”
    

      “Ah! . . . Has Varlamov been by or not?”
    

      “No, Ivan Ivanitch. His clerk, Grigory Yegoritch, went by yesterday
      morning and said that he had to be to-day at the Molokans’ farm.”
    

      “Good! so we will go after the waggons directly and then on to the
      Molokans’.”
    

      “Mercy on us, Ivan Ivanitch!” Moisey Moisevitch cried in
      horror, flinging up his hands. “Where are you going for the night?
      You will have a nice little supper and stay the night, and to-morrow
      morning, please God, you can go on and overtake anyone you like.”
    

      “There is no time for that. . . . Excuse me, Moisey Moisevitch,
      another time; but now I must make haste. We’ll stay a quarter of an
      hour and then go on; we can stay the night at the Molokans’.”
    

      “A quarter of an hour!” squealed Moisey Moisevitch. “Have
      you no fear of God, Ivan Ivanitch? You will compel me to hide your caps
      and lock the door! You must have a cup of tea and a snack of something,
      anyway.”
    

      “We have no time for tea,” said Kuzmitchov.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch bent his head on one side, crooked his knees, and put
      his open hands before him as though warding off a blow, while with a smile
      of agonized sweetness he began imploring:
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch! Father Christopher! Do be so good as to take a cup
      of tea with me. Surely I am not such a bad man that you can’t even
      drink tea in my house? Ivan Ivanitch!”
    

      “Well, we may just as well have a cup of tea,” said Father
      Christopher, with a sympathetic smile; “that won’t keep us
      long.”
    

      “Very well,” Kuzmitchov assented.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch, in a fluster uttered an exclamation of joy, and
      shrugging as though he had just stepped out of cold weather into warm, ran
      to the door and cried in the same frantic voice in which he had called
      Solomon:
    

      “Rosa! Rosa! Bring the samovar!”
    

      A minute later the door opened, and Solomon came into the room carrying a
      large tray in his hands. Setting the tray on the table, he looked away
      sarcastically with the same queer smile as before. Now, by the light of
      the lamp, it was possible to see his smile distinctly; it was very
      complex, and expressed a variety of emotions, but the predominant element
      in it was undisguised contempt. He seemed to be thinking of something
      ludicrous and silly, to be feeling contempt and dislike, to be pleased at
      something and waiting for the favourable moment to turn something into
      ridicule and to burst into laughter. His long nose, his thick lips, and
      his sly prominent eyes seemed tense with the desire to laugh. Looking at
      his face, Kuzmitchov smiled ironically and asked:
    

      “Solomon, why did you not come to our fair at N. this summer, and
      act some Jewish scenes?”
    

      Two years before, as Yegorushka remembered very well, at one of the booths
      at the fair at N., Solomon had performed some scenes of Jewish life, and
      his acting had been a great success. The allusion to this made no
      impression whatever upon Solomon. Making no answer, he went out and
      returned a little later with the samovar.
    

      When he had done what he had to do at the table he moved a little aside,
      and, folding his arms over his chest and thrusting out one leg, fixed his
      sarcastic eyes on Father Christopher. There was something defiant,
      haughty, and contemptuous in his attitude, and at the same time it was
      comic and pitiful in the extreme, because the more impressive his attitude
      the more vividly it showed up his short trousers, his bobtail coat, his
      caricature of a nose, and his bird-like plucked-looking little figure.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch brought a footstool from the other room and sat down a
      little way from the table.
    

      “I wish you a good appetite! Tea and sugar!” he began, trying
      to entertain his visitors. “I hope you will enjoy it. Such rare
      guests, such rare ones; it is years since I last saw Father Christopher.
      And will no one tell me who is this nice little gentleman?” he
      asked, looking tenderly at Yegorushka.
    

      “He is the son of my sister, Olga Ivanovna,” answered
      Kuzmitchov.
    

      “And where is he going?”
    

      “To school. We are taking him to a high school.”
    

      In his politeness, Moisey Moisevitch put on a look of wonder and wagged
      his head expressively.
    

      “Ah, that is a fine thing,” he said, shaking his finger at the
      samovar. “That’s a fine thing. You will come back from the
      high school such a gentleman that we shall all take off our hats to you.
      You will be wealthy and wise and so grand that your mamma will be
      delighted. Oh, that’s a fine thing!”
    

      He paused a little, stroked his knees, and began again in a jocose and
      deferential tone.
    

      “You must excuse me, Father Christopher, but I am thinking of
      writing to the bishop to tell him you are robbing the merchants of their
      living. I shall take a sheet of stamped paper and write that I suppose
      Father Christopher is short of pence, as he has taken up with trade and
      begun selling wool.”
    

      “H’m, yes . . . it’s a queer notion in my old age,”
      said Father Christopher, and he laughed. “I have turned from priest
      to merchant, brother. I ought to be at home now saying my prayers, instead
      of galloping about the country like a Pharaoh in his chariot. . . .
      Vanity!”
    

      “But it will mean a lot of pence!”
    

      “Oh, I dare say! More kicks than halfpence, and serve me right. The
      wool’s not mine, but my son-in-law Mikhail’s!”
    

      “Why doesn’t he go himself?”
    

      “Why, because . . . His mother’s milk is scarcely dry upon his
      lips. He can buy wool all right, but when it comes to selling, he has no
      sense; he is young yet. He has wasted all his money; he wanted to grow
      rich and cut a dash, but he tried here and there, and no one would give
      him his price. And so the lad went on like that for a year, and then he
      came to me and said, ‘Daddy, you sell the wool for me; be kind and
      do it! I am no good at the business!’ And that is true enough. As
      soon as there is anything wrong then it’s ‘Daddy,’ but
      till then they could get on without their dad. When he was buying he did
      not consult me, but now when he is in difficulties it’s Daddy’s
      turn. And what does his dad know about it? If it were not for Ivan
      Ivanitch, his dad could do nothing. I have a lot of worry with them.”
    

      “Yes; one has a lot of worry with one’s children, I can tell
      you that,” sighed Moisey Moisevitch. “I have six of my own.
      One needs schooling, another needs doctoring, and a third needs nursing,
      and when they grow up they are more trouble still. It is not only
      nowadays, it was the same in Holy Scripture. When Jacob had little
      children he wept, and when they grew up he wept still more bitterly.”
    

      “H’m, yes . . .” Father Christopher assented pensively,
      looking at his glass. “I have no cause myself to rail against the
      Lord. I have lived to the end of my days as any man might be thankful to
      live. . . . I have married my daughters to good men, my sons I have set up
      in life, and now I am free; I have done my work and can go where I like. I
      live in peace with my wife. I eat and drink and sleep and rejoice in my
      grandchildren, and say my prayers and want nothing more. I live on the fat
      of the land, and don’t need to curry favour with anyone. I have
      never had any trouble from childhood, and now suppose the Tsar were to ask
      me, ‘What do you need? What would you like?’ why, I don’t
      need anything. I have everything I want and everything to be thankful for.
      In the whole town there is no happier man than I am. My only trouble is I
      have so many sins, but there —only God is without sin. That’s
      right, isn’t it?”
    

      “No doubt it is.”
    

      “I have no teeth, of course; my poor old back aches; there is one
      thing and another, . . . asthma and that sort of thing. . . . I ache. . .
      . The flesh is weak, but then think of my age! I am in the eighties! One
      can’t go on for ever; one mustn’t outstay one’s welcome.”
    

      Father Christopher suddenly thought of something, spluttered into his
      glass and choked with laughter. Moisey Moisevitch laughed, too, from
      politeness, and he, too, cleared his throat.
    

      “So funny!” said Father Christopher, and he waved his hand.
      “My eldest son Gavrila came to pay me a visit. He is in the medical
      line, and is a district doctor in the province of Tchernigov. . . .
      ‘Very well . . .’ I said to him, ‘here I have asthma and
      one thing and another. . . . You are a doctor; cure your father!’ He
      undressed me on the spot, tapped me, listened, and all sorts of tricks, .
      . . kneaded my stomach, and then he said, ‘Dad, you ought to be
      treated with compressed air.’” Father Christopher laughed
      convulsively, till the tears came into his eyes, and got up.
    

      “And I said to him, ‘God bless your compressed air!’”
      he brought out through his laughter, waving both hands. “God bless
      your compressed air!”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch got up, too, and with his hands on his stomach, went off
      into shrill laughter like the yap of a lap-dog.
    

      “God bless the compressed air!” repeated Father Christopher,
      laughing.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch laughed two notes higher and so violently that he could
      hardly stand on his feet.
    

      “Oh dear!” he moaned through his laughter. “Let me get
      my breath . . . . You’ll be the death of me.”
    

      He laughed and talked, though at the same time he was casting timorous and
      suspicious looks at Solomon. The latter was standing in the same attitude
      and still smiling. To judge from his eyes and his smile, his contempt and
      hatred were genuine, but that was so out of keeping with his
      plucked-looking figure that it seemed to Yegorushka as though he were
      putting on his defiant attitude and biting sarcastic smile to play the
      fool for the entertainment of their honoured guests.
    

      After drinking six glasses of tea in silence, Kuzmitchov cleared a space
      before him on the table, took his bag, the one which he kept under his
      head when he slept under the chaise, untied the string and shook it. Rolls
      of paper notes were scattered out of the bag on the table.
    

      “While we have the time, Father Christopher, let us reckon up,”
      said Kuzmitchov.
    

      Moisey Moisevitch was embarrassed at the sight of the money. He got up,
      and, as a man of delicate feeling unwilling to pry into other people’s
      secrets, he went out of the room on tiptoe, swaying his arms. Solomon
      remained where he was.
    

      “How many are there in the rolls of roubles?” Father
      Christopher began.
    

      “The rouble notes are done up in fifties, . . . the three-rouble
      notes in nineties, the twenty-five and hundred roubles in thousands. You
      count out seven thousand eight hundred for Varlamov, and I will count out
      for Gusevitch. And mind you don’t make a mistake. . .”
    

      Yegorushka had never in his life seen so much money as was lying on the
      table before him. There must have been a great deal of money, for the roll
      of seven thousand eight hundred, which Father Christopher put aside for
      Varlamov, seemed very small compared with the whole heap. At any other
      time such a mass of money would have impressed Yegorushka, and would have
      moved him to reflect how many cracknels, buns and poppy-cakes could be
      bought for that money. Now he looked at it listlessly, only conscious of
      the disgusting smell of kerosene and rotten apples that came from the heap
      of notes. He was exhausted by the jolting ride in the chaise, tired out
      and sleepy. His head was heavy, his eyes would hardly keep open and his
      thoughts were tangled like threads. If it had been possible he would have
      been relieved to lay his head on the table, so as not to see the lamp and
      the fingers moving over the heaps of notes, and to have let his tired
      sleepy thoughts go still more at random. When he tried to keep awake, the
      light of the lamp, the cups and the fingers grew double, the samovar
      heaved and the smell of rotten apples seemed even more acrid and
      disgusting.
    

      “Ah, money, money!” sighed Father Christopher, smiling.
      “You bring trouble! Now I expect my Mihailo is asleep and dreaming
      that I am going to bring him a heap of money like this.”
    

      “Your Mihailo Timofevitch is a man who doesn’t understand
      business,” said Kuzmitchov in an undertone; “he undertakes
      what isn’t his work, but you understand and can judge. You had
      better hand over your wool to me, as I have said already, and I would give
      you half a rouble above my own price—yes, I would, simply out of
      regard for you. . . .”
    

      “No, Ivan Ivanitch.” Father Christopher sighed. “I thank
      you for your kindness. . . . Of course, if it were for me to decide, I
      shouldn’t think twice about it; but as it is, the wool is not mine,
      as you know. . . .”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch came in on tiptoe. Trying from delicacy not to look at
      the heaps of money, he stole up to Yegorushka and pulled at his shirt from
      behind.
    

      “Come along, little gentleman,” he said in an undertone,
      “come and see the little bear I can show you! Such a queer, cross
      little bear. Oo-oo!”
    

      The sleepy boy got up and listlessly dragged himself after Moisey
      Moisevitch to see the bear. He went into a little room, where, before he
      saw anything, he felt he could not breathe from the smell of something
      sour and decaying, which was much stronger here than in the big room and
      probably spread from this room all over the house. One part of the room
      was occupied by a big bed, covered with a greasy quilt and another by a
      chest of drawers and heaps of rags of all kinds from a woman’s stiff
      petticoat to children’s little breeches and braces. A tallow candle
      stood on the chest of drawers.
    

      Instead of the promised bear, Yegorushka saw a big fat Jewess with her
      hair hanging loose, in a red flannel skirt with black sprigs on it; she
      turned with difficulty in the narrow space between the bed and the chest
      of drawers and uttered drawn-out moaning as though she had toothache. On
      seeing Yegorushka, she made a doleful, woe-begone face, heaved a long
      drawn-out sigh, and before he had time to look round, put to his lips a
      slice of bread smeared with honey.
    

      “Eat it, dearie, eat it!” she said. “You are here
      without your mamma, and no one to look after you. Eat it up.”
    

      Yegorushka did eat it, though after the goodies and poppy-cakes he had
      every day at home, he did not think very much of the honey, which was
      mixed with wax and bees’ wings. He ate while Moisey Moisevitch and
      the Jewess looked at him and sighed.
    

      “Where are you going, dearie?” asked the Jewess.
    

      “To school,” answered Yegorushka.
    

      “And how many brothers and sisters have you got?”
    

      “I am the only one; there are no others.”
    

      “O-oh!” sighed the Jewess, and turned her eyes upward. “Poor
      mamma, poor mamma! How she will weep and miss you! We are going to send
      our Nahum to school in a year. O-oh!”
    

      “Ah, Nahum, Nahum!” sighed Moisey Moisevitch, and the skin of
      his pale face twitched nervously. “And he is so delicate.”
    

      The greasy quilt quivered, and from beneath it appeared a child’s
      curly head on a very thin neck; two black eyes gleamed and stared with
      curiosity at Yegorushka. Still sighing, Moisey Moisevitch and the Jewess
      went to the chest of drawers and began talking in Yiddish. Moisey
      Moisevitch spoke in a low bass undertone, and altogether his talk in
      Yiddish was like a continual “ghaal-ghaal-ghaal-ghaal, . . .”
      while his wife answered him in a shrill voice like a turkeycock’s,
      and the whole effect of her talk was something like “Too-too-too-too!”
      While they were consulting, another little curly head on a thin neck
      peeped out of the greasy quilt, then a third, then a fourth. . . . If
      Yegorushka had had a fertile imagination he might have imagined that the
      hundred-headed hydra was hiding under the quilt.
    

      “Ghaal-ghaal-ghaal-ghaal!” said Moisey Moisevitch.
    

      “Too-too-too-too!” answered the Jewess.
    

      The consultation ended in the Jewess’s diving with a deep sigh into
      the chest of drawers, and, unwrapping some sort of green rag there, she
      took out a big rye cake made in the shape of a heart.
    

      “Take it, dearie,” she said, giving Yegorushka the cake;
      “you have no mamma now—no one to give you nice things.”
    

      Yegorushka stuck the cake in his pocket and staggered to the door, as he
      could not go on breathing the foul, sour air in which the innkeeper and
      his wife lived. Going back to the big room, he settled himself more
      comfortably on the sofa and gave up trying to check his straying thoughts.
    

      As soon as Kuzmitchov had finished counting out the notes he put them back
      into the bag. He did not treat them very respectfully and stuffed them
      into the dirty sack without ceremony, as indifferently as though they had
      not been money but waste paper.
    

      Father Christopher was talking to Solomon.
    

      “Well, Solomon the Wise!” he said, yawning and making the sign
      of the cross over his mouth. “How is business?”
    

      “What sort of business are you talking about?” asked Solomon,
      and he looked as fiendish, as though it were a hint of some crime on his
      part.
    

      “Oh, things in general. What are you doing?”
    

      “What am I doing?” Solomon repeated, and he shrugged his
      shoulders. “The same as everyone else. . . . You see, I am a menial,
      I am my brother’s servant; my brother’s the servant of the
      visitors; the visitors are Varlamov’s servants; and if I had ten
      millions, Varlamov would be my servant.”
    

      “Why would he be your servant?”
    

      “Why, because there isn’t a gentleman or millionaire who isn’t
      ready to lick the hand of a scabby Jew for the sake of making a kopeck.
      Now, I am a scabby Jew and a beggar. Everybody looks at me as though I
      were a dog, but if I had money Varlamov would play the fool before me just
      as Moisey does before you.”
    

      Father Christopher and Kuzmitchov looked at each other. Neither of them
      understood Solomon. Kuzmitchov looked at him sternly and dryly, and asked:
    

      “How can you compare yourself with Varlamov, you blockhead?”
    

      “I am not such a fool as to put myself on a level with Varlamov,”
      answered Solomon, looking sarcastically at the speaker. “Though
      Varlamov is a Russian, he is at heart a scabby Jew; money and gain are all
      he lives for, but I threw my money in the stove! I don’t want money,
      or land, or sheep, and there is no need for people to be afraid of me and
      to take off their hats when I pass. So I am wiser than your Varlamov and
      more like a man!”
    

      A little later Yegorushka, half asleep, heard Solomon in a hoarse hollow
      voice choked with hatred, in hurried stuttering phrases, talking about the
      Jews. At first he talked correctly in Russian, then he fell into the tone
      of a Jewish recitation, and began speaking as he had done at the fair with
      an exaggerated Jewish accent.
    

      “Stop! . . .” Father Christopher said to him. “If you
      don’t like your religion you had better change it, but to laugh at
      it is a sin; it is only the lowest of the low who will make fun of his
      religion.”
    

      “You don’t understand,” Solomon cut him short rudely.
      “I am talking of one thing and you are talking of something else. .
      . .”
    

      “One can see you are a foolish fellow,” sighed Father
      Christopher. “I admonish you to the best of my ability, and you are
      angry. I speak to you like an old man quietly, and you answer like a
      turkeycock: ‘Bla—-bla—-bla!’ You really are a
      queer fellow. . . .”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch came in. He looked anxiously at Solomon and at his
      visitors, and again the skin on his face quivered nervously. Yegorushka
      shook his head and looked about him; he caught a passing glimpse of
      Solomon’s face at the very moment when it was turned three-quarters
      towards him and when the shadow of his long nose divided his left cheek in
      half; the contemptuous smile mingled with that shadow; the gleaming
      sarcastic eyes, the haughty expression, and the whole plucked-looking
      little figure, dancing and doubling itself before Yegorushka’s eyes,
      made him now not like a buffoon, but like something one sometimes dreams
      of, like an evil spirit.
    

      “What a ferocious fellow you’ve got here, Moisey Moisevitch!
      God bless him!” said Father Christopher with a smile. “You
      ought to find him a place or a wife or something. . . . There’s no
      knowing what to make of him. . . .”
    

      Kuzmitchov frowned angrily. Moisey Moisevitch looked uneasily and
      inquiringly at his brother and the visitors again.
    

      “Solomon, go away!” he said shortly. “Go away!”
      and he added something in Yiddish. Solomon gave an abrupt laugh and went
      out.
    

      “What was it?” Moisey Moisevitch asked Father Christopher
      anxiously.
    

      “He forgets himself,” answered Kuzmitchov. “He’s
      rude and thinks too much of himself.”
    

      “I knew it!” Moisey Moisevitch cried in horror, clasping his
      hands. “Oh dear, oh dear!” he muttered in a low voice. “Be
      so kind as to excuse it, and don’t be angry. He is such a queer
      fellow, such a queer fellow! Oh dear, oh dear! He is my own brother, but I
      have never had anything but trouble from him. You know he’s. . .”
    

      Moisey Moisevitch crooked his finger by his forehead and went on:
    

      “He is not in his right mind; . . . he’s hopeless. And I don’t
      know what I am to do with him! He cares for nobody, he respects nobody,
      and is afraid of nobody. . . . You know he laughs at everybody, he says
      silly things, speaks familiarly to anyone. You wouldn’t believe it,
      Varlamov came here one day and Solomon said such things to him that he
      gave us both a taste of his whip. . . . But why whip me? Was it my fault?
      God has robbed him of his wits, so it is God’s will, and how am I to
      blame?”
    

      Ten minutes passed and Moisey Moisevitch was still muttering in an
      undertone and sighing:
    

      “He does not sleep at night, and is always thinking and thinking and
      thinking, and what he is thinking about God only knows. If you go to him
      at night he is angry and laughs. He doesn’t like me either . . . .
      And there is nothing he wants! When our father died he left us each six
      thousand roubles. I bought myself an inn, married, and now I have
      children; and he burnt all his money in the stove. Such a pity, such a
      pity! Why burn it? If he didn’t want it he could give it to me, but
      why burn it?”
    

      Suddenly the swing-door creaked and the floor shook under footsteps.
      Yegorushka felt a draught of cold air, and it seemed to him as though some
      big black bird had passed by him and had fluttered its wings close in his
      face. He opened his eyes. . . . His uncle was standing by the sofa with
      his sack in his hands ready for departure; Father Christopher, holding his
      broad-brimmed top-hat, was bowing to someone and smiling—not his
      usual soft kindly smile, but a respectful forced smile which did not suit
      his face at all—while Moisey Moisevitch looked as though his body
      had been broken into three parts, and he were balancing and doing his
      utmost not to drop to pieces. Only Solomon stood in the corner with his
      arms folded, as though nothing had happened, and smiled contemptuously as
      before.
    

      “Your Excellency must excuse us for not being tidy,” moaned
      Moisey Moisevitch with the agonizingly sweet smile, taking no more notice
      of Kuzmitchov or Father Christopher, but swaying his whole person so as to
      avoid dropping to pieces. “We are plain folks, your Excellency.”
    

      Yegorushka rubbed his eyes. In the middle of the room there really was
      standing an Excellency, in the form of a young plump and very beautiful
      woman in a black dress and a straw hat. Before Yegorushka had time to
      examine her features the image of the solitary graceful poplar he had seen
      that day on the hill for some reason came into his mind.
    

      “Has Varlamov been here to-day?” a woman’s voice
      inquired.
    

      “No, your Excellency,” said Moisey Moisevitch.
    

      “If you see him to-morrow, ask him to come and see me for a minute.”
    

      All at once, quite unexpectedly, Yegorushka saw half an inch from his eyes
      velvety black eyebrows, big brown eyes, delicate feminine cheeks with
      dimples, from which smiles seemed radiating all over the face like
      sunbeams. There was a glorious scent.
    

      “What a pretty boy!” said the lady. “Whose boy is it?
      Kazimir Mihalovitch, look what a charming fellow! Good heavens, he is
      asleep!”
    

      And the lady kissed Yegorushka warmly on both cheeks, and he smiled and,
      thinking he was asleep, shut his eyes. The swing-door squeaked, and there
      was the sound of hurried footsteps, coming in and going out.
    

      “Yegorushka, Yegorushka!” he heard two bass voices whisper.
      “Get up; it is time to start.”
    

      Somebody, it seemed to be Deniska, set him on his feet and led him by the
      arm. On the way he half-opened his eyes and once more saw the beautiful
      lady in the black dress who had kissed him. She was standing in the middle
      of the room and watched him go out, smiling at him and nodding her head in
      a friendly way. As he got near the door he saw a handsome, stoutly built,
      dark man in a bowler hat and in leather gaiters. This must have been the
      lady’s escort.
    

      “Woa!” he heard from the yard.
    

      At the front door Yegorushka saw a splendid new carriage and a pair of
      black horses. On the box sat a groom in livery, with a long whip in his
      hands. No one but Solomon came to see the travellers off. His face was
      tense with a desire to laugh; he looked as though he were waiting
      impatiently for the visitors to be gone, so that he might laugh at them
      without restraint.
    

      “The Countess Dranitsky,” whispered Father Christopher,
      clambering into the chaise.
    

      “Yes, Countess Dranitsky,” repeated Kuzmitchov, also in a
      whisper.
    

      The impression made by the arrival of the countess was probably very
      great, for even Deniska spoke in a whisper, and only ventured to lash his
      bays and shout when the chaise had driven a quarter of a mile away and
      nothing could be seen of the inn but a dim light.
    

      IV
    

      Who was this elusive, mysterious Varlamov of whom people talked so much,
      whom Solomon despised, and whom even the beautiful countess needed?
      Sitting on the box beside Deniska, Yegorushka, half asleep, thought about
      this person. He had never seen him. But he had often heard of him and
      pictured him in his imagination. He knew that Varlamov possessed several
      tens of thousands of acres of land, about a hundred thousand sheep, and a
      great deal of money. Of his manner of life and occupation Yegorushka knew
      nothing, except that he was always “going his rounds in these parts,”
      and he was always being looked for.
    

      At home Yegorushka had heard a great deal of the Countess Dranitsky, too.
      She, too, had some tens of thousands of acres, a great many sheep, a stud
      farm and a great deal of money, but she did not “go rounds,”
      but lived at home in a splendid house and grounds, about which Ivan
      Ivanitch, who had been more than once at the countess’s on business,
      and other acquaintances told many marvellous tales; thus, for instance,
      they said that in the countess’s drawing-room, where the portraits
      of all the kings of Poland hung on the walls, there was a big table-clock
      in the form of a rock, on the rock a gold horse with diamond eyes,
      rearing, and on the horse the figure of a rider also of gold, who
      brandished his sword to right and to left whenever the clock struck. They
      said, too, that twice a year the countess used to give a ball, to which
      the gentry and officials of the whole province were invited, and to which
      even Varlamov used to come; all the visitors drank tea from silver
      samovars, ate all sorts of extraordinary things (they had strawberries and
      raspberries, for instance, in winter at Christmas), and danced to a band
      which played day and night. . . .
    

      “And how beautiful she is,” thought Yegorushka, remembering
      her face and smile.
    

      Kuzmitchov, too, was probably thinking about the countess. For when the
      chaise had driven a mile and a half he said:
    

      “But doesn’t that Kazimir Mihalovitch plunder her right and
      left! The year before last when, do you remember, I bought some wool from
      her, he made over three thousand from my purchase alone.”
    

      “That is just what you would expect from a Pole,” said Father
      Christopher.
    

      “And little does it trouble her. Young and foolish, as they say, her
      head is full of nonsense.”
    

      Yegorushka, for some reason, longed to think of nothing but Varlamov and
      the countess, particularly the latter. His drowsy brain utterly refused
      ordinary thoughts, was in a cloud and retained only fantastic fairy-tale
      images, which have the advantage of springing into the brain of themselves
      without any effort on the part of the thinker, and completely vanishing of
      themselves at a mere shake of the head; and, indeed, nothing that was
      around him disposed to ordinary thoughts. On the right there were the dark
      hills which seemed to be screening something unseen and terrible; on the
      left the whole sky about the horizon was covered with a crimson glow, and
      it was hard to tell whether there was a fire somewhere, or whether it was
      the moon about to rise. As by day the distance could be seen, but its
      tender lilac tint had gone, quenched by the evening darkness, in which the
      whole steppe was hidden like Moisey Moisevitch’s children under the
      quilt.
    

      Corncrakes and quails do not call in the July nights, the nightingale does
      not sing in the woodland marsh, and there is no scent of flowers, but
      still the steppe is lovely and full of life. As soon as the sun goes down
      and the darkness enfolds the earth, the day’s weariness is
      forgotten, everything is forgiven, and the steppe breathes a light sigh
      from its broad bosom. As though because the grass cannot see in the dark
      that it has grown old, a gay youthful twitter rises up from it, such as is
      not heard by day; chirruping, twittering, whistling, scratching, the
      basses, tenors and sopranos of the steppe all mingle in an incessant,
      monotonous roar of sound in which it is sweet to brood on memories and
      sorrows. The monotonous twitter soothes to sleep like a lullaby; you drive
      and feel you are falling asleep, but suddenly there comes the abrupt
      agitated cry of a wakeful bird, or a vague sound like a voice crying out
      in wonder “A-ah, a-ah!” and slumber closes one’s eyelids
      again. Or you drive by a little creek where there are bushes and hear the
      bird, called by the steppe dwellers “the sleeper,” call
      “Asleep, asleep, asleep!” while another laughs or breaks into
      trills of hysterical weeping—that is the owl. For whom do they call
      and who hears them on that plain, God only knows, but there is deep
      sadness and lamentation in their cry. . . . There is a scent of hay and
      dry grass and belated flowers, but the scent is heavy, sweetly mawkish and
      soft.
    

      Everything can be seen through the mist, but it is hard to make out the
      colours and the outlines of objects. Everything looks different from what
      it is. You drive on and suddenly see standing before you right in the
      roadway a dark figure like a monk; it stands motionless, waiting, holding
      something in its hands. . . . Can it be a robber? The figure comes closer,
      grows bigger; now it is on a level with the chaise, and you see it is not
      a man, but a solitary bush or a great stone. Such motionless expectant
      figures stand on the low hills, hide behind the old barrows, peep out from
      the high grass, and they all look like human beings and arouse suspicion.
    

      And when the moon rises the night becomes pale and dim. The mist seems to
      have passed away. The air is transparent, fresh and warm; one can see well
      in all directions and even distinguish the separate stalks of grass by the
      wayside. Stones and bits of pots can be seen at a long distance. The
      suspicious figures like monks look blacker against the light background of
      the night, and seem more sinister. More and more often in the midst of the
      monotonous chirruping there comes the sound of the “A-ah, a-ah!”
      of astonishment troubling the motionless air, and the cry of a sleepless
      or delirious bird. Broad shadows move across the plain like clouds across
      the sky, and in the inconceivable distance, if you look long and intently
      at it, misty monstrous shapes rise up and huddle one against another. . .
      . It is rather uncanny. One glances at the pale green, star-spangled sky
      on which there is no cloudlet, no spot, and understands why the warm air
      is motionless, why nature is on her guard, afraid to stir: she is afraid
      and reluctant to lose one instant of life. Of the unfathomable depth and
      infinity of the sky one can only form a conception at sea and on the
      steppe by night when the moon is shining. It is terribly lonely and
      caressing; it looks down languid and alluring, and its caressing sweetness
      makes one giddy.
    

      You drive on for one hour, for a second. . . . You meet upon the way a
      silent old barrow or a stone figure put up God knows when and by whom; a
      nightbird floats noiselessly over the earth, and little by little those
      legends of the steppes, the tales of men you have met, the stories of some
      old nurse from the steppe, and all the things you have managed to see and
      treasure in your soul, come back to your mind. And then in the churring of
      insects, in the sinister figures, in the ancient barrows, in the blue sky,
      in the moonlight, in the flight of the nightbird, in everything you see
      and hear, triumphant beauty, youth, the fulness of power, and the
      passionate thirst for life begin to be apparent; the soul responds to the
      call of her lovely austere fatherland, and longs to fly over the steppes
      with the nightbird. And in the triumph of beauty, in the exuberance of
      happiness you are conscious of yearning and grief, as though the steppe
      knew she was solitary, knew that her wealth and her inspiration were
      wasted for the world, not glorified in song, not wanted by anyone; and
      through the joyful clamour one hears her mournful, hopeless call for
      singers, singers!
    

      “Woa! Good-evening, Panteley! Is everything all right?”
    

      “First-rate, Ivan Ivanitch!
    

      “Haven’t you seen Varlamov, lads?”
    

      “No, we haven’t.”
    

      Yegorushka woke up and opened his eyes. The chaise had stopped. On the
      right the train of waggons stretched for a long way ahead on the road, and
      men were moving to and fro near them. All the waggons being loaded up with
      great bales of wool looked very high and fat, while the horses looked
      short-legged and little.
    

      “Well, then, we shall go on to the Molokans’!”
      Kuzmitchov said aloud. “The Jew told us that Varlamov was putting up
      for the night at the Molokans’. So good-bye, lads! Good luck to you!”
    

      “Good-bye, Ivan Ivanitch,” several voices replied.
    

      “I say, lads,” Kuzmitchov cried briskly, “you take my
      little lad along with you! Why should he go jolting off with us for
      nothing? You put him on the bales, Panteley, and let him come on slowly,
      and we shall overtake you. Get down, Yegor! Go on; it’s all right. .
      . .”
    

      Yegorushka got down from the box-seat. Several hands caught him, lifted
      him high into the air, and he found himself on something big, soft, and
      rather wet with dew. It seemed to him now as though the sky were quite
      close and the earth far away.
    

      “Hey, take his little coat!” Deniska shouted from somewhere
      far below.
    

      His coat and bundle flung up from far below fell close to Yegorushka.
      Anxious not to think of anything, he quickly put his bundle under his head
      and covered himself with his coat, and stretching his legs out and
      shrinking a little from the dew, he laughed with content.
    

      “Sleep, sleep, sleep, . . .” he thought.
    

      “Don’t be unkind to him, you devils!” he heard Deniska’s
      voice below.
    

      “Good-bye, lads; good luck to you,” shouted Kuzmitchov.
      “I rely upon you!”
    

      “Don’t you be uneasy, Ivan Ivanitch!”
    

      Deniska shouted to the horses, the chaise creaked and started, not along
      the road, but somewhere off to the side. For two minutes there was
      silence, as though the waggons were asleep and there was no sound except
      the clanking of the pails tied on at the back of the chaise as it slowly
      died away in the distance. Then someone at the head of the waggons
      shouted:
    

      “Kiruha! Sta-art!”
    

      The foremost of the waggons creaked, then the second, then the third. . .
      . Yegorushka felt the waggon he was on sway and creak also. The waggons
      were moving. Yegorushka took a tighter hold of the cord with which the
      bales were tied on, laughed again with content, shifted the cake in his
      pocket, and fell asleep just as he did in his bed at home. . . .
    

      When he woke up the sun had risen, it was screened by an ancient barrow,
      and, trying to shed its light upon the earth, it scattered its beams in
      all directions and flooded the horizon with gold. It seemed to Yegorushka
      that it was not in its proper place, as the day before it had risen behind
      his back, and now it was much more to his left. . . . And the whole
      landscape was different. There were no hills now, but on all sides,
      wherever one looked, there stretched the brown cheerless plain; here and
      there upon it small barrows rose up and rooks flew as they had done the
      day before. The belfries and huts of some village showed white in the
      distance ahead; as it was Sunday the Little Russians were at home baking
      and cooking—that could be seen by the smoke which rose from every
      chimney and hung, a dark blue transparent veil, over the village. In
      between the huts and beyond the church there were blue glimpses of a
      river, and beyond the river a misty distance. But nothing was so different
      from yesterday as the road. Something extraordinarily broad, spread out
      and titanic, stretched over the steppe by way of a road. It was a grey
      streak well trodden down and covered with dust, like all roads. Its width
      puzzled Yegorushka and brought thoughts of fairy tales to his mind. Who
      travelled along that road? Who needed so much space? It was strange and
      unintelligible. It might have been supposed that giants with immense
      strides, such as Ilya Muromets and Solovy the Brigand, were still
      surviving in Russia, and that their gigantic steeds were still alive.
      Yegorushka, looking at the road, imagined some half a dozen high chariots
      racing along side by side, like some he used to see in pictures in his
      Scripture history; these chariots were each drawn by six wild furious
      horses, and their great wheels raised a cloud of dust to the sky, while
      the horses were driven by men such as one may see in one’s dreams or
      in imagination brooding over fairy tales. And if those figures had
      existed, how perfectly in keeping with the steppe and the road they would
      have been!
    

      Telegraph-poles with two wires on them stretched along the right side of
      the road to its furthermost limit. Growing smaller and smaller they
      disappeared near the village behind the huts and green trees, and then
      again came into sight in the lilac distance in the form of very small thin
      sticks that looked like pencils stuck into the ground. Hawks, falcons, and
      crows sat on the wires and looked indifferently at the moving waggons.
    

      Yegorushka was lying in the last of the waggons, and so could see the
      whole string. There were about twenty waggons, and there was a driver to
      every three waggons. By the last waggon, the one in which Yegorushka was,
      there walked an old man with a grey beard, as short and lean as Father
      Christopher, but with a sunburnt, stern and brooding face. It is very
      possible that the old man was not stern and not brooding, but his red
      eyelids and his sharp long nose gave his face a stern frigid expression
      such as is common with people in the habit of continually thinking of
      serious things in solitude. Like Father Christopher he was wearing a
      wide-brimmed top-hat, not like a gentleman’s, but made of brown
      felt, and in shape more like a cone with the top cut off than a real
      top-hat. Probably from a habit acquired in cold winters, when he must more
      than once have been nearly frozen as he trudged beside the waggons, he
      kept slapping his thighs and stamping with his feet as he walked. Noticing
      that Yegorushka was awake, he looked at him and said, shrugging his
      shoulders as though from the cold:
    

      “Ah, you are awake, youngster! So you are the son of Ivan Ivanitch?”
    

      “No; his nephew. . . .”
    

      “Nephew of Ivan Ivanitch? Here I have taken off my boots and am
      hopping along barefoot. My feet are bad; they are swollen, and it’s
      easier without my boots . . . easier, youngster . . . without boots, I
      mean. . . . So you are his nephew? He is a good man; no harm in him. . . .
      God give him health. . . . No harm in him . . . I mean Ivan Ivanitch. . .
      . He has gone to the Molokans’. . . . O Lord, have mercy upon us!”
    

      The old man talked, too, as though it were very cold, pausing and not
      opening his mouth properly; and he mispronounced the labial consonants,
      stuttering over them as though his lips were frozen. As he talked to
      Yegorushka he did not once smile, and he seemed stern.
    

      Two waggons ahead of them there walked a man wearing a long reddish-brown
      coat, a cap and high boots with sagging bootlegs and carrying a whip in
      his hand. This was not an old man, only about forty. When he looked round
      Yegorushka saw a long red face with a scanty goat-beard and a spongy
      looking swelling under his right eye. Apart from this very ugly swelling,
      there was another peculiar thing about him which caught the eye at once:
      in his left hand he carried a whip, while he waved the right as though he
      were conducting an unseen choir; from time to time he put the whip under
      his arm, and then he conducted with both hands and hummed something to
      himself.
    

      The next driver was a long rectilinear figure with extremely sloping
      shoulders and a back as flat as a board. He held himself as stiffly erect
      as though he were marching or had swallowed a yard measure. His hands did
      not swing as he walked, but hung down as if they were straight sticks, and
      he strode along in a wooden way, after the manner of toy soldiers, almost
      without bending his knees, and trying to take as long steps as possible.
      While the old man or the owner of the spongy swelling were taking two
      steps he succeeded in taking only one, and so it seemed as though he were
      walking more slowly than any of them, and would drop behind. His face was
      tied up in a rag, and on his head something stuck up that looked like a
      monk’s peaked cap; he was dressed in a short Little Russian coat,
      with full dark blue trousers and bark shoes.
    

      Yegorushka did not even distinguish those that were farther on. He lay on
      his stomach, picked a little hole in the bale, and, having nothing better
      to do, began twisting the wool into a thread. The old man trudging along
      below him turned out not to be so stern as one might have supposed from
      his face. Having begun a conversation, he did not let it drop.
    

      “Where are you going?” he asked, stamping with his feet.
    

      “To school,” answered Yegorushka.
    

      “To school? Aha! . . . Well, may the Queen of Heaven help you. Yes.
      One brain is good, but two are better. To one man God gives one brain, to
      another two brains, and to another three. . . . To another three, that is
      true. . . . One brain you are born with, one you get from learning, and a
      third with a good life. So you see, my lad, it is a good thing if a man
      has three brains. Living is easier for him, and, what’s more, dying
      is, too. Dying is, too. . . . And we shall all die for sure.”
    

      The old man scratched his forehead, glanced upwards at Yegorushka with his
      red eyes, and went on:
    

      “Maxim Nikolaitch, the gentleman from Slavyanoserbsk, brought a
      little lad to school, too, last year. I don’t know how he is getting
      on there in studying the sciences, but he was a nice good little lad. . .
      . God give them help, they are nice gentlemen. Yes, he, too, brought his
      boy to school. . . . In Slavyanoserbsk there is no establishment, I
      suppose, for study. No. . . . But it is a nice town. . . . There’s
      an ordinary school for simple folks, but for the higher studies there is
      nothing. No, that’s true. What’s your name? . . .”
    

      “Yegorushka.”
    

      “Yegory, then. . . . The holy martyr Yegory, the Bearer of Victory,
      whose day is the twenty-third of April. And my christian name is Panteley,
      . . . Panteley Zaharov Holodov. . . . We are Holodovs . . . . I am a
      native of—maybe you’ve heard of it—Tim in the province
      of Kursk. My brothers are artisans and work at trades in the town, but I
      am a peasant. . . . I have remained a peasant. Seven years ago I went
      there—home, I mean. I went to the village and to the town. . . . To
      Tim, I mean. Then, thank God, they were all alive and well; . . . but now
      I don’t know. . . . Maybe some of them are dead. . . . And it’s
      time they did die, for some of them are older than I am. Death is all
      right; it is good so long, of course, as one does not die without
      repentance. There is no worse evil than an impenitent death; an impenitent
      death is a joy to the devil. And if you want to die penitent, so that you
      may not be forbidden to enter the mansions of the Lord, pray to the holy
      martyr Varvara. She is the intercessor. She is, that’s the truth. .
      . . For God has given her such a place in the heavens that everyone has
      the right to pray to her for penitence.”
    

      Panteley went on muttering, and apparently did not trouble whether
      Yegorushka heard him or not. He talked listlessly, mumbling to himself,
      without raising or dropping his voice, but succeeded in telling him a
      great deal in a short time. All he said was made up of fragments that had
      very little connection with one another, and quite uninteresting for
      Yegorushka. Possibly he talked only in order to reckon over his thoughts
      aloud after the night spent in silence, in order to see if they were all
      there. After talking of repentance, he spoke about a certain Maxim
      Nikolaitch from Slavyanoserbsk.
    

      “Yes, he took his little lad; . . . he took him, that’s true .
      . .”
    

      One of the waggoners walking in front darted from his place, ran to one
      side and began lashing on the ground with his whip. He was a stalwart,
      broad-shouldered man of thirty, with curly flaxen hair and a look of great
      health and vigour. Judging from the movements of his shoulders and the
      whip, and the eagerness expressed in his attitude, he was beating
      something alive. Another waggoner, a short stubby little man with a bushy
      black beard, wearing a waistcoat and a shirt outside his trousers, ran up
      to him. The latter broke into a deep guffaw of laughter and coughing and
      said: “I say, lads, Dymov has killed a snake!”
    

      There are people whose intelligence can be gauged at once by their voice
      and laughter. The man with the black beard belonged to that class of
      fortunate individuals; impenetrable stupidity could be felt in his voice
      and laugh. The flaxen-headed Dymov had finished, and lifting from the
      ground with his whip something like a cord, flung it with a laugh into the
      cart.
    

      “That’s not a viper; it’s a grass snake!” shouted
      someone.
    

      The man with the wooden gait and the bandage round his face strode up
      quickly to the dead snake, glanced at it and flung up his stick-like arms.
    

      “You jail-bird!” he cried in a hollow wailing voice. “What
      have you killed a grass snake for? What had he done to you, you damned
      brute? Look, he has killed a grass snake; how would you like to be treated
      so?”
    

      “Grass snakes ought not to be killed, that’s true,”
      Panteley muttered placidly, “they ought not. . . They are not
      vipers; though it looks like a snake, it is a gentle, innocent creature. .
      . . It’s friendly to man, the grass snake is.”
    

      Dymov and the man with the black beard were probably ashamed, for they
      laughed loudly, and not answering, slouched lazily back to their waggons.
      When the hindmost waggon was level with the spot where the dead snake lay,
      the man with his face tied up standing over it turned to Panteley and
      asked in a tearful voice:
    

      “Grandfather, what did he want to kill the grass snake for?”
    

      His eyes, as Yegorushka saw now, were small and dingy looking; his face
      was grey, sickly and looked somehow dingy too while his chin was red and
      seemed very much swollen.
    

      “Grandfather, what did he kill it for?” he repeated, striding
      along beside Panteley.
    

      “A stupid fellow. His hands itch to kill, and that is why he does
      it,” answered the old man; “but he oughtn’t to kill a
      grass snake, that’s true. . . . Dymov is a ruffian, we all know, he
      kills everything he comes across, and Kiruha did not interfere. He ought
      to have taken its part, but instead of that, he goes off into ‘Ha-ha-ha!’
      and ‘Ho-ho-ho!’ . . . But don’t be angry, Vassya. . . .
      Why be angry? They’ve killed it—well, never mind them. Dymov
      is a ruffian and Kiruha acted from foolishness—never mind. . . .
      They are foolish people without understanding—but there, don’t
      mind them. Emelyan here never touches what he shouldn’t; he never
      does; . . . that is true, . . . because he is a man of education, while
      they are stupid. . . . Emelyan, he doesn’t touch things.”
    

      The waggoner in the reddish-brown coat and the spongy swelling on his
      face, who was conducting an unseen choir, stopped. Hearing his name, and
      waiting till Panteley and Vassya came up to him, he walked beside them.
    

      “What are you talking about?” he asked in a husky muffled
      voice.
    

      “Why, Vassya here is angry,” said Panteley. “So I have
      been saying things to him to stop his being angry. . . . Oh, how my
      swollen feet hurt! Oh, oh! They are more inflamed than ever for Sunday,
      God’s holy day!”
    

      “It’s from walking,” observed Vassya.
    

      “No, lad, no. It’s not from walking. When I walk it seems
      easier; when I lie down and get warm, . . . it’s deadly. Walking is
      easier for me.”
    

      Emelyan, in his reddish-brown coat, walked between Panteley and Vassya and
      waved his arms, as though they were going to sing. After waving them a
      little while he dropped them, and croaked out hopelessly:
    

      “I have no voice. It’s a real misfortune. All last night and
      this morning I have been haunted by the trio ‘Lord, have Mercy’
      that we sang at the wedding at Marionovsky’s. It’s in my head
      and in my throat. It seems as though I could sing it, but I can’t; I
      have no voice.”
    

      He paused for a minute, thinking, then went on:
    

      “For fifteen years I was in the choir. In all the Lugansky works
      there was, maybe, no one with a voice like mine. But, confound it, I
      bathed two years ago in the Donets, and I can’t get a single note
      true ever since. I took cold in my throat. And without a voice I am like a
      workman without hands.”
    

      “That’s true,” Panteley agreed.
    

      “I think of myself as a ruined man and nothing more.”
    

      At that moment Vassya chanced to catch sight of Yegorushka. His eyes grew
      moist and smaller than ever.
    

      “There’s a little gentleman driving with us,” and he
      covered his nose with his sleeve as though he were bashful. “What a
      grand driver! Stay with us and you shall drive the waggons and sell wool.”
    

      The incongruity of one person being at once a little gentleman and a
      waggon driver seemed to strike him as very queer and funny, for he burst
      into a loud guffaw, and went on enlarging upon the idea. Emelyan glanced
      upwards at Yegorushka, too, but coldly and cursorily. He was absorbed in
      his own thoughts, and had it not been for Vassya, would not have noticed
      Yegorushka’s presence. Before five minutes had passed he was waving
      his arms again, then describing to his companions the beauties of the
      wedding anthem, “Lord, have Mercy,” which he had remembered in
      the night. He put the whip under his arm and waved both hands.
    

      A mile from the village the waggons stopped by a well with a crane.
      Letting his pail down into the well, black-bearded Kiruha lay on his
      stomach on the framework and thrust his shaggy head, his shoulders, and
      part of his chest into the black hole, so that Yegorushka could see
      nothing but his short legs, which scarcely touched the ground. Seeing the
      reflection of his head far down at the bottom of the well, he was
      delighted and went off into his deep bass stupid laugh, and the echo from
      the well answered him. When he got up his neck and face were as red as
      beetroot. The first to run up and drink was Dymov. He drank laughing,
      often turning from the pail to tell Kiruha something funny, then he turned
      round, and uttered aloud, to be heard all over the steppe, five very bad
      words. Yegorushka did not understand the meaning of such words, but he
      knew very well they were bad words. He knew the repulsion his friends and
      relations silently felt for such words. He himself, without knowing why,
      shared that feeling and was accustomed to think that only drunk and
      disorderly people enjoy the privilege of uttering such words aloud. He
      remembered the murder of the grass snake, listened to Dymov’s
      laughter, and felt something like hatred for the man. And as ill-luck
      would have it, Dymov at that moment caught sight of Yegorushka, who had
      climbed down from the waggon and gone up to the well. He laughed aloud and
      shouted:
    

      “I say, lads, the old man has been brought to bed of a boy in the
      night!”
    

      Kiruha laughed his bass laugh till he coughed. Someone else laughed too,
      while Yegorushka crimsoned and made up his mind finally that Dymov was a
      very wicked man.
    

      With his curly flaxen head, with his shirt opened on his chest and no hat
      on, Dymov looked handsome and exceptionally strong; in every movement he
      made one could see the reckless dare-devil and athlete, knowing his value.
      He shrugged his shoulders, put his arms akimbo, talked and laughed louder
      than any of the rest, and looked as though he were going to lift up
      something very heavy with one hand and astonish the whole world by doing
      so. His mischievous mocking eyes glided over the road, the waggons, and
      the sky without resting on anything, and seemed looking for someone to
      kill, just as a pastime, and something to laugh at. Evidently he was
      afraid of no one, would stick at nothing, and most likely was not in the
      least interested in Yegorushka’s opinion of him. . . . Yegorushka
      meanwhile hated his flaxen head, his clear face, and his strength with his
      whole heart, listened with fear and loathing to his laughter, and kept
      thinking what word of abuse he could pay him out with.
    

      Panteley, too, went up to the pail. He took out of his pocket a little
      green glass of an ikon lamp, wiped it with a rag, filled it from the pail
      and drank from it, then filled it again, wrapped the little glass in the
      rag, and then put it back into his pocket.
    

      “Grandfather, why do you drink out of a lamp?” Yegorushka
      asked him, surprised.
    

      “One man drinks out of a pail and another out of a lamp,” the
      old man answered evasively. “Every man to his own taste. . . . You
      drink out of the pail—well, drink, and may it do you good. . . .”
    

      “You darling, you beauty!” Vassya said suddenly, in a
      caressing, plaintive voice. “You darling!”
    

      His eyes were fixed on the distance; they were moist and smiling, and his
      face wore the same expression as when he had looked at Yegorushka.
    

      “Who is it you are talking to?” asked Kiruha.
    

      “A darling fox, . . . lying on her back, playing like a dog.”
    

      Everyone began staring into the distance, looking for the fox, but no one
      could see it, only Vassya with his grey muddy-looking eyes, and he was
      enchanted by it. His sight was extraordinarily keen, as Yegorushka learnt
      afterwards. He was so long-sighted that the brown steppe was for him
      always full of life and interest. He had only to look into the distance to
      see a fox, a hare, a bustard, or some other animal keeping at a distance
      from men. There was nothing strange in seeing a hare running away or a
      flying bustard—everyone crossing the steppes could see them; but it
      was not vouchsafed to everyone to see wild animals in their own haunts
      when they were not running nor hiding, nor looking about them in alarm.
      Yet Vassya saw foxes playing, hares washing themselves with their paws,
      bustards preening their wings and hammering out their hollow nests. Thanks
      to this keenness of sight, Vassya had, besides the world seen by everyone,
      another world of his own, accessible to no one else, and probably a very
      beautiful one, for when he saw something and was in raptures over it it
      was impossible not to envy him.
    

      When the waggons set off again, the church bells were ringing for service.
    

      V
    

      The train of waggons drew up on the bank of a river on one side of a
      village. The sun was blazing, as it had been the day before; the air was
      stagnant and depressing. There were a few willows on the bank, but the
      shade from them did not fall on the earth, but on the water, where it was
      wasted; even in the shade under the waggon it was stifling and wearisome.
      The water, blue from the reflection of the sky in it, was alluring.
    

      Styopka, a waggoner whom Yegorushka noticed now for the first time, a
      Little Russian lad of eighteen, in a long shirt without a belt, and full
      trousers that flapped like flags as he walked, undressed quickly, ran
      along the steep bank and plunged into the water. He dived three times,
      then swam on his back and shut his eyes in his delight. His face was
      smiling and wrinkled up as though he were being tickled, hurt and amused.
    

      On a hot day when there is nowhere to escape from the sultry, stifling
      heat, the splash of water and the loud breathing of a man bathing sounds
      like good music to the ear. Dymov and Kiruha, looking at Styopka,
      undressed quickly and one after the other, laughing loudly in eager
      anticipation of their enjoyment, dropped into the water, and the quiet,
      modest little river resounded with snorting and splashing and shouting.
      Kiruha coughed, laughed and shouted as though they were trying to drown
      him, while Dymov chased him and tried to catch him by the leg.
    

      “Ha-ha-ha!” he shouted. “Catch him! Hold him!”
    

      Kiruha laughed and enjoyed himself, but his expression was the same as it
      had been on dry land, stupid, with a look of astonishment on it as though
      someone had, unnoticed, stolen up behind him and hit him on the head with
      the butt-end of an axe. Yegorushka undressed, too, but did not let himself
      down by the bank, but took a run and a flying leap from the height of
      about ten feet. Describing an arc in the air, he fell into the water, sank
      deep, but did not reach the bottom; some force, cold and pleasant to the
      touch, seemed to hold him up and bring him back to the surface. He popped
      out and, snorting and blowing bubbles, opened his eyes; but the sun was
      reflected in the water quite close to his face. At first blinding spots of
      light, then rainbow colours and dark patches, flitted before his eyes. He
      made haste to dive again, opened his eyes in the water and saw something
      cloudy-green like a sky on a moonlight night. Again the same force would
      not let him touch the bottom and stay in the coolness, but lifted him to
      the surface. He popped out and heaved a sigh so deep that he had a feeling
      of space and freshness, not only in his chest, but in his stomach. Then,
      to get from the water everything he possibly could get, he allowed himself
      every luxury; he lay on his back and basked, splashed, frolicked, swam on
      his face, on his side, on his back and standing up—just as he
      pleased till he was exhausted. The other bank was thickly overgrown with
      reeds; it was golden in the sun, and the flowers of the reeds hung
      drooping to the water in lovely tassels. In one place the reeds were
      shaking and nodding, with their flowers rustling— Styopka and Kiruha
      were hunting crayfish.
    

      “A crayfish, look, lads! A crayfish!” Kiruha cried
      triumphantly and actually showed a crayfish.
    

      Yegorushka swam up to the reeds, dived, and began fumbling among their
      roots. Burrowing in the slimy, liquid mud, he felt something sharp and
      unpleasant—perhaps it really was a crayfish. But at that minute
      someone seized him by the leg and pulled him to the surface. Spluttering
      and coughing, Yegorushka opened his eyes and saw before him the wet
      grinning face of the dare-devil Dymov. The impudent fellow was breathing
      hard, and from a look in his eyes he seemed inclined for further mischief.
      He held Yegorushka tight by the leg, and was lifting his hand to take hold
      of his neck. But Yegorushka tore himself away with repulsion and terror,
      as though disgusted at being touched and afraid that the bully would drown
      him, and said:
    

      “Fool! I’ll punch you in the face.”
    

      Feeling that this was not sufficient to express his hatred, he thought a
      minute and added:
    

      “You blackguard! You son of a bitch!”
    

      But Dymov, as though nothing were the matter, took no further notice of
      Yegorushka, but swam off to Kiruha, shouting:
    

      “Ha-ha-ha! Let us catch fish! Mates, let us catch fish.”
    

      “To be sure,” Kiruha agreed; “there must be a lot of
      fish here.”
    

      “Styopka, run to the village and ask the peasants for a net!
    

      “They won’t give it to me.”
    

      “They will, you ask them. Tell them that they should give it to us
      for Christ’s sake, because we are just the same as pilgrims.”
    

      “That’s true.”
    

      Styopka clambered out of the water, dressed quickly, and without a cap on
      he ran, his full trousers flapping, to the village. The water lost all its
      charm for Yegorushka after his encounter with Dymov. He got out and began
      dressing. Panteley and Vassya were sitting on the steep bank, with their
      legs hanging down, looking at the bathers. Emelyan was standing naked, up
      to his knees in the water, holding on to the grass with one hand to
      prevent himself from falling while the other stroked his body. With his
      bony shoulder-blades, with the swelling under his eye, bending down and
      evidently afraid of the water, he made a ludicrous figure. His face was
      grave and severe. He looked angrily at the water, as though he were just
      going to upbraid it for having given him cold in the Donets and robbed him
      of his voice.
    

      “And why don’t you bathe?” Yegorushka asked Vassya.
    

      “Oh, I don’t care for it, . . .” answered Vassya.
    

      “How is it your chin is swollen?”
    

      “It’s bad. . . . I used to work at the match factory, little
      sir. . . . The doctor used to say that it would make my jaw rot. The air
      is not healthy there. There were three chaps beside me who had their jaws
      swollen, and with one of them it rotted away altogether.”
    

      Styopka soon came back with the net. Dymov and Kiruha were already turning
      blue and getting hoarse by being so long in the water, but they set about
      fishing eagerly. First they went to a deep place beside the reeds; there
      Dymov was up to his neck, while the water went over squat Kiruha’s
      head. The latter spluttered and blew bubbles, while Dymov stumbling on the
      prickly roots, fell over and got caught in the net; both flopped about in
      the water, and made a noise, and nothing but mischief came of their
      fishing.
    

      “It’s deep,” croaked Kiruha. “You won’t
      catch anything.”
    

      “Don’t tug, you devil!” shouted Dymov trying to put the
      net in the proper position. “Hold it up.”
    

      “You won’t catch anything here,” Panteley shouted from
      the bank. “You are only frightening the fish, you stupids! Go more
      to the left! It’s shallower there!”
    

      Once a big fish gleamed above the net; they all drew a breath, and Dymov
      struck the place where it had vanished with his fist, and his face
      expressed vexation.
    

      “Ugh!” cried Panteley, and he stamped his foot. “You’ve
      let the perch slip! It’s gone!”
    

      Moving more to the left, Dymov and Kiruha picked out a shallower place,
      and then fishing began in earnest. They had wandered off some hundred
      paces from the waggons; they could be seen silently trying to go as deep
      as they could and as near the reeds, moving their legs a little at a time,
      drawing out the nets, beating the water with their fists to drive them
      towards the nets. From the reeds they got to the further bank; they drew
      the net out, then, with a disappointed air, lifting their knees high as
      they walked, went back into the reeds. They were talking about something,
      but what it was no one could hear. The sun was scorching their backs, the
      flies were stinging them, and their bodies had turned from purple to
      crimson. Styopka was walking after them with a pail in his hands; he had
      tucked his shirt right up under his armpits, and was holding it up by the
      hem with his teeth. After every successful catch he lifted up some fish,
      and letting it shine in the sun, shouted:
    

      “Look at this perch! We’ve five like that!”
    

      Every time Dymov, Kiruha and Styopka pulled out the net they could be seen
      fumbling about in the mud in it, putting some things into the pail and
      throwing other things away; sometimes they passed something that was in
      the net from hand to hand, examined it inquisitively, then threw that,
      too, away.
    

      “What is it?” they shouted to them from the bank.
    

      Styopka made some answer, but it was hard to make out his words. Then he
      climbed out of the water and, holding the pail in both hands, forgetting
      to let his shirt drop, ran to the waggons.
    

      “It’s full!” he shouted, breathing hard. “Give us
      another!”
    

      Yegorushka looked into the pail: it was full. A young pike poked its ugly
      nose out of the water, and there were swarms of crayfish and little fish
      round about it. Yegorushka put his hand down to the bottom and stirred up
      the water; the pike vanished under the crayfish and a perch and a tench
      swam to the surface instead of it. Vassya, too, looked into the pail. His
      eyes grew moist and his face looked as caressing as before when he saw the
      fox. He took something out of the pail, put it to his mouth and began
      chewing it.
    

      “Mates,” said Styopka in amazement, “Vassya is eating a
      live gudgeon! Phoo!”
    

      “It’s not a gudgeon, but a minnow,” Vassya answered
      calmly, still munching.
    

      He took a fish’s tail out of his mouth, looked at it caressingly,
      and put it back again. While he was chewing and crunching with his teeth
      it seemed to Yegorushka that he saw before him something not human. Vassya’s
      swollen chin, his lustreless eyes, his extraordinary sharp sight, the fish’s
      tail in his mouth, and the caressing friendliness with which he crunched
      the gudgeon made him like an animal.
    

      Yegorushka felt dreary beside him. And the fishing was over, too. He
      walked about beside the waggons, thought a little, and, feeling bored,
      strolled off to the village.
    

      Not long afterwards he was standing in the church, and with his forehead
      leaning on somebody’s back, listened to the singing of the choir.
      The service was drawing to a close. Yegorushka did not understand church
      singing and did not care for it. He listened a little, yawned, and began
      looking at the backs and heads before him. In one head, red and wet from
      his recent bathe, he recognized Emelyan. The back of his head had been
      cropped in a straight line higher than is usual; the hair in front had
      been cut unbecomingly high, and Emelyan’s ears stood out like two
      dock leaves, and seemed to feel themselves out of place. Looking at the
      back of his head and his ears, Yegorushka, for some reason, thought that
      Emelyan was probably very unhappy. He remembered the way he conducted with
      his hands, his husky voice, his timid air when he was bathing, and felt
      intense pity for him. He longed to say something friendly to him.
    

      “I am here, too,” he said, putting out his hand.
    

      People who sing tenor or bass in the choir, especially those who have at
      any time in their lives conducted, are accustomed to look with a stern and
      unfriendly air at boys. They do not give up this habit, even when they
      leave off being in a choir. Turning to Yegorushka, Emelyan looked at him
      from under his brows and said:
    

      “Don’t play in church!”
    

      Then Yegorushka moved forwards nearer to the ikon-stand. Here he saw
      interesting people. On the right side, in front of everyone, a lady and a
      gentleman were standing on a carpet. There were chairs behind them. The
      gentleman was wearing newly ironed shantung trousers; he stood as
      motionless as a soldier saluting, and held high his bluish shaven chin.
      There was a very great air of dignity in his stand-up collar, in his blue
      chin, in his small bald patch and his cane. His neck was so strained from
      excess of dignity, and his chin was drawn up so tensely, that it looked as
      though his head were ready to fly off and soar upwards any minute. The
      lady, who was stout and elderly and wore a white silk shawl, held her head
      on one side and looked as though she had done someone a favour, and wanted
      to say: “Oh, don’t trouble yourself to thank me; I don’t
      like it . . . .” A thick wall of Little Russian heads stood all
      round the carpet.
    

      Yegorushka went up to the ikon-stand and began kissing the local ikons.
      Before each image he slowly bowed down to the ground, without getting up,
      looked round at the congregation, then got up and kissed the ikon. The
      contact of his forehead with the cold floor afforded him great
      satisfaction. When the beadle came from the altar with a pair of long
      snuffers to put out the candles, Yegorushka jumped up quickly from the
      floor and ran up to him.
    

      “Have they given out the holy bread?” he asked.
    

      “There is none; there is none,” the beadle muttered gruffly.
      “It is no use your. . .”
    

      The service was over; Yegorushka walked out of the church in a leisurely
      way, and began strolling about the market-place. He had seen a good many
      villages, market-places, and peasants in his time, and everything that met
      his eyes was entirely without interest for him. At a loss for something to
      do, he went into a shop over the door of which hung a wide strip of red
      cotton. The shop consisted of two roomy, badly lighted parts; in one half
      they sold drapery and groceries, in the other there were tubs of tar, and
      there were horse-collars hanging from the ceiling; from both came the
      savoury smell of leather and tar. The floor of the shop had been watered;
      the man who watered it must have been a very whimsical and original
      person, for it was sprinkled in patterns and mysterious symbols. The
      shopkeeper, an overfed-looking man with a broad face and round beard,
      apparently a Great Russian, was standing, leaning his person over the
      counter. He was nibbling a piece of sugar as he drank his tea, and heaved
      a deep sigh at every sip. His face expressed complete indifference, but
      each sigh seemed to be saying:
    

      “Just wait a minute; I will give it you.”
    

      “Give me a farthing’s worth of sunflower seeds,”
      Yegorushka said, addressing him.
    

      The shopkeeper raised his eyebrows, came out from behind the counter, and
      poured a farthing’s worth of sunflower seeds into Yegorushka’s
      pocket, using an empty pomatum pot as a measure. Yegorushka did not want
      to go away. He spent a long time in examining the box of cakes, thought a
      little and asked, pointing to some little cakes covered with the mildew of
      age:
    

      “How much are these cakes?”
    

      “Two for a farthing.”
    

      Yegorushka took out of his pocket the cake given him the day before by the
      Jewess, and asked him:
    

      “And how much do you charge for cakes like this?”
    

      The shopman took the cake in his hands, looked at it from all sides, and
      raised one eyebrow.
    

      “Like that?” he asked.
    

      Then he raised the other eyebrow, thought a minute, and answered:
    

      “Two for three farthings. . . .”
    

      A silence followed.
    

      “Whose boy are you?” the shopman asked, pouring himself out
      some tea from a red copper teapot.
    

      “The nephew of Ivan Ivanitch.”
    

      “There are all sorts of Ivan Ivanitchs,” the shopkeeper
      sighed. He looked over Yegorushka’s head towards the door, paused a
      minute and asked:
    

      “Would you like some tea?”
    

      “Please. . . .” Yegorushka assented not very readily, though
      he felt an intense longing for his usual morning tea.
    

      The shopkeeper poured him out a glass and gave him with it a bit of sugar
      that looked as though it had been nibbled. Yegorushka sat down on the
      folding chair and began drinking it. He wanted to ask the price of a pound
      of sugar almonds, and had just broached the subject when a customer walked
      in, and the shopkeeper, leaving his glass of tea, attended to his
      business. He led the customer into the other half, where there was a smell
      of tar, and was there a long time discussing something with him. The
      customer, a man apparently very obstinate and pig-headed, was continually
      shaking his head to signify his disapproval, and retreating towards the
      door. The shopkeeper tried to persuade him of something and began pouring
      some oats into a big sack for him.
    

      “Do you call those oats?” the customer said gloomily. “Those
      are not oats, but chaff. It’s a mockery to give that to the hens;
      enough to make the hens laugh. . . . No, I will go to Bondarenko.”
    

      When Yegorushka went back to the river a small camp fire was smoking on
      the bank. The waggoners were cooking their dinner. Styopka was standing in
      the smoke, stirring the cauldron with a big notched spoon. A little on one
      side Kiruha and Vassya, with eyes reddened from the smoke, were sitting
      cleaning the fish. Before them lay the net covered with slime and water
      weeds, and on it lay gleaming fish and crawling crayfish.
    

      Emelyan, who had not long been back from the church, was sitting beside
      Panteley, waving his arm and humming just audibly in a husky voice:
      “To Thee we sing. . . .” Dymov was moving about by the horses.
    

      When they had finished cleaning them, Kiruha and Vassya put the fish and
      the living crayfish together in the pail, rinsed them, and from the pail
      poured them all into the boiling water.
    

      “Shall I put in some fat?” asked Styopka, skimming off the
      froth.
    

      “No need. The fish will make its own gravy,” answered Kiruha.
    

      Before taking the cauldron off the fire Styopka scattered into the water
      three big handfuls of millet and a spoonful of salt; finally he tried it,
      smacked his lips, licked the spoon, and gave a self-satisfied grunt, which
      meant that the grain was done.
    

      All except Panteley sat down near the cauldron and set to work with their
      spoons.
    

      “You there! Give the little lad a spoon!” Panteley observed
      sternly. “I dare say he is hungry too!”
    

      “Ours is peasant fare,” sighed Kiruha.
    

      “Peasant fare is welcome, too, when one is hungry.”
    

      They gave Yegorushka a spoon. He began eating, not sitting, but standing
      close to the cauldron and looking down into it as in a hole. The grain
      smelt of fish and fish-scales were mixed up with the millet. The crayfish
      could not be hooked out with a spoon, and the men simply picked them out
      of the cauldron with their hands; Vassya did so particularly freely, and
      wetted his sleeves as well as his hands in the mess. But yet the stew
      seemed to Yegorushka very nice, and reminded him of the crayfish soup
      which his mother used to make at home on fast-days. Panteley was sitting
      apart munching bread.
    

      “Grandfather, why aren’t you eating?” Emelyan asked him.
    

      “I don’t eat crayfish. . . . Nasty things,” the old man
      said, and turned away with disgust.
    

      While they were eating they all talked. From this conversation Yegorushka
      gathered that all his new acquaintances, in spite of the differences of
      their ages and their characters, had one point in common which made them
      all alike: they were all people with a splendid past and a very poor
      present. Of their past they all— every one of them—spoke with
      enthusiasm; their attitude to the present was almost one of contempt. The
      Russian loves recalling life, but he does not love living. Yegorushka did
      not yet know that, and before the stew had been all eaten he firmly
      believed that the men sitting round the cauldron were the injured victims
      of fate. Panteley told them that in the past, before there were railways,
      he used to go with trains of waggons to Moscow and to Nizhni, and used to
      earn so much that he did not know what to do with his money; and what
      merchants there used to be in those days! what fish! how cheap everything
      was! Now the roads were shorter, the merchants were stingier, the peasants
      were poorer, the bread was dearer, everything had shrunk and was on a
      smaller scale. Emelyan told them that in old days he had been in the choir
      in the Lugansky works, and that he had a remarkable voice and read music
      splendidly, while now he had become a peasant and lived on the charity of
      his brother, who sent him out with his horses and took half his earnings.
      Vassya had once worked in a match factory; Kiruha had been a coachman in a
      good family, and had been reckoned the smartest driver of a three-in-hand
      in the whole district. Dymov, the son of a well-to-do peasant, lived at
      ease, enjoyed himself and had known no trouble till he was twenty, when
      his stern harsh father, anxious to train him to work, and afraid he would
      be spoiled at home, had sent him to a carrier’s to work as a hired
      labourer. Styopka was the only one who said nothing, but from his
      beardless face it was evident that his life had been a much better one in
      the past.
    

      Thinking of his father, Dymov frowned and left off eating. Sullenly from
      under his brows he looked round at his companions and his eye rested upon
      Yegorushka.
    

      “You heathen, take off your cap,” he said rudely. “You
      can’t eat with your cap on, and you a gentleman too!”
    

      Yegorushka took off his hat and did not say a word, but the stew lost all
      savour for him, and he did not hear Panteley and Vassya intervening on his
      behalf. A feeling of anger with the insulting fellow was rankling
      oppressively in his breast, and he made up his mind that he would do him
      some injury, whatever it cost him.
    

      After dinner everyone sauntered to the waggons and lay down in the shade.
    

      “Are we going to start soon, grandfather?” Yegorushka asked
      Panteley.
    

      “In God’s good time we shall set off. There’s no
      starting yet; it is too hot. . . . O Lord, Thy will be done. Holy Mother.
      . . Lie down, little lad.”
    

      Soon there was a sound of snoring from under the waggons. Yegorushka meant
      to go back to the village, but on consideration, yawned and lay down by
      the old man.
    

      VI
    

      The waggons remained by the river the whole day, and set off again when
      the sun was setting.
    

      Yegorushka was lying on the bales again; the waggon creaked softly and
      swayed from side to side. Panteley walked below, stamping his feet,
      slapping himself on his thighs and muttering. The air was full of the
      churring music of the steppes, as it had been the day before.
    

      Yegorushka lay on his back, and, putting his hands under his head, gazed
      upwards at the sky. He watched the glow of sunset kindle, then fade away;
      guardian angels covering the horizon with their gold wings disposed
      themselves to slumber. The day had passed peacefully; the quiet peaceful
      night had come, and they could stay tranquilly at home in heaven. . . .
      Yegorushka saw the sky by degrees grow dark and the mist fall over the
      earth—saw the stars light up, one after the other. . . .
    

      When you gaze a long while fixedly at the deep sky thoughts and feelings
      for some reason merge in a sense of loneliness. One begins to feel
      hopelessly solitary, and everything one used to look upon as near and akin
      becomes infinitely remote and valueless; the stars that have looked down
      from the sky thousands of years already, the mists and the
      incomprehensible sky itself, indifferent to the brief life of man, oppress
      the soul with their silence when one is left face to face with them and
      tries to grasp their significance. One is reminded of the solitude
      awaiting each one of us in the grave, and the reality of life seems awful
      . . . full of despair. . . .
    

      Yegorushka thought of his grandmother, who was sleeping now under the
      cherry-trees in the cemetery. He remembered how she lay in her coffin with
      pennies on her eyes, how afterwards she was shut in and let down into the
      grave; he even recalled the hollow sound of the clods of earth on the
      coffin lid. . . . He pictured his granny in the dark and narrow coffin,
      helpless and deserted by everyone. His imagination pictured his granny
      suddenly awakening, not understanding where she was, knocking upon the lid
      and calling for help, and in the end swooning with horror and dying again.
      He imagined his mother dead, Father Christopher, Countess Dranitsky,
      Solomon. But however much he tried to imagine himself in the dark tomb,
      far from home, outcast, helpless and dead, he could not succeed; for
      himself personally he could not admit the possibility of death, and felt
      that he would never die. . . .
    

      Panteley, for whom death could not be far away, walked below and went on
      reckoning up his thoughts.
    

      “All right. . . . Nice gentlefolk, . . .” he muttered. “Took
      his little lad to school—but how he is doing now I haven’t
      heard say —in Slavyanoserbsk. I say there is no establishment for
      teaching them to be very clever. . . . No, that’s true—a nice
      little lad, no harm in him. . . . He’ll grow up and be a help to his
      father . . . . You, Yegory, are little now, but you’ll grow big and
      will keep your father and mother. . . . So it is ordained of God, ‘Honour
      your father and your mother.’ . . . I had children myself, but they
      were burnt. . . . My wife was burnt and my children, . . . that’s
      true. . . . The hut caught fire on the night of Epiphany. . . . I was not
      at home, I was driving in Oryol. In Oryol. . . . Marya dashed out into the
      street, but remembering that the children were asleep in the hut, ran back
      and was burnt with her children. . . . Next day they found nothing but
      bones.”
    

      About midnight Yegorushka and the waggoners were again sitting round a
      small camp fire. While the dry twigs and stems were burning up, Kiruha and
      Vassya went off somewhere to get water from a creek; they vanished into
      the darkness, but could be heard all the time talking and cElinking their
      pails; so the creek was not far away. The light from the fire lay a great
      flickering patch on the earth; though the moon was bright, yet everything
      seemed impenetrably black beyond that red patch. The light was in the
      waggoners’ eyes, and they saw only part of the great road; almost
      unseen in the darkness the waggons with the bales and the horses looked
      like a mountain of undefined shape. Twenty paces from the camp fire at the
      edge of the road stood a wooden cross that had fallen aslant. Before the
      camp fire had been lighted, when he could still see things at a distance,
      Yegorushka had noticed that there was a similar old slanting cross on the
      other side of the great road.
    

      Coming back with the water, Kiruha and Vassya filled the cauldron and
      fixed it over the fire. Styopka, with the notched spoon in his hand, took
      his place in the smoke by the cauldron, gazing dreamily into the water for
      the scum to rise. Panteley and Emelyan were sitting side by side in
      silence, brooding over something. Dymov was lying on his stomach, with his
      head propped on his fists, looking into the fire. . . . Styopka’s
      shadow was dancing over him, so that his handsome face was at one minute
      covered with darkness, at the next lighted up. . . . Kiruha and Vassya
      were wandering about at a little distance gathering dry grass and bark for
      the fire. Yegorushka, with his hands in his pockets, was standing by
      Panteley, watching how the fire devoured the grass.
    

      All were resting, musing on something, and they glanced cursorily at the
      cross over which patches of red light were dancing. There is something
      melancholy, pensive, and extremely poetical about a solitary tomb; one
      feels its silence, and the silence gives one the sense of the presence of
      the soul of the unknown man who lies under the cross. Is that soul at
      peace on the steppe? Does it grieve in the moonlight? Near the tomb the
      steppe seems melancholy, dreary and mournful; the grass seems more
      sorrowful, and one fancies the grasshoppers chirrup less freely, and there
      is no passer-by who would not remember that lonely soul and keep looking
      back at the tomb, till it was left far behind and hidden in the mists. . .
      .
    

      “Grandfather, what is that cross for?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      Panteley looked at the cross and then at Dymov and asked:
    

      “Nikola, isn’t this the place where the mowers killed the
      merchants?”
    

      Dymov not very readily raised himself on his elbow, looked at the road and
      said:
    

      “Yes, it is. . . .”
    

      A silence followed. Kiruha broke up some dry stalks, crushed them up
      together and thrust them under the cauldron. The fire flared up brightly;
      Styopka was enveloped in black smoke, and the shadow cast by the cross
      danced along the road in the dusk beside the waggons.
    

      “Yes, they were killed,” Dymov said reluctantly. “Two
      merchants, father and son, were travelling, selling holy images. They put
      up in the inn not far from here that is now kept by Ignat Fomin. The old
      man had a drop too much, and began boasting that he had a lot of money
      with him. We all know merchants are a boastful set, God preserve us. . . .
      They can’t resist showing off before the likes of us. And at the
      time some mowers were staying the night at the inn. So they overheard what
      the merchants said and took note of it.”
    

      “O Lord! . . . Holy Mother!” sighed Panteley.
    

      “Next day, as soon as it was light,” Dymov went on, “the
      merchants were preparing to set off and the mowers tried to join them.
      ‘Let us go together, your worships. It will be more cheerful and
      there will be less danger, for this is an out-of-the-way place. . . .’
      The merchants had to travel at a walking pace to avoid breaking the
      images, and that just suited the mowers. . . .”
    

      Dymov rose into a kneeling position and stretched.
    

      “Yes,” he went on, yawning. “Everything went all right
      till they reached this spot, and then the mowers let fly at them with
      their scythes. The son, he was a fine young fellow, snatched the scythe
      from one of them, and he used it, too. . . . Well, of course, they got the
      best of it because there were eight of them. They hacked at the merchants
      so that there was not a sound place left on their bodies; when they had
      finished they dragged both of them off the road, the father to one side
      and the son to the other. Opposite that cross there is another cross on
      this side. . . . Whether it is still standing, I don’t know. . . . I
      can’t see from here. . . .”
    

      “It is,” said Kiruha.
    

      “They say they did not find much money afterwards.”
    

      “No,” Panteley confirmed; “they only found a hundred
      roubles.”
    

      “And three of them died afterwards, for the merchant had cut them
      badly with the scythe, too. They died from loss of blood. One had his hand
      cut off, so that they say he ran three miles without his hand, and they
      found him on a mound close to Kurikovo. He was squatting on his heels,
      with his head on his knees, as though he were lost in thought, but when
      they looked at him there was no life in him and he was dead. . . .”
    

      “They found him by the track of blood,” said Panteley.
    

      Everyone looked at the cross, and again there was a hush. From somewhere,
      most likely from the creek, floated the mournful cry of the bird: “Sleep!
      sleep! sleep!”
    

      “There are a great many wicked people in the world,” said
      Emelyan.
    

      “A great many,” assented Panteley, and he moved up closer to
      the fire as though he were frightened. “A great many,” he went
      on in a low voice. “I’ve seen lots and lots of them. . . .
      Wicked people! . . . I have seen a great many holy and just, too. . . .
      Queen of Heaven, save us and have mercy on us. I remember once thirty
      years ago, or maybe more, I was driving a merchant from Morshansk. The
      merchant was a jolly handsome fellow, with money, too . . . the merchant
      was . . . a nice man, no harm in him. . . . So we put up for the night at
      an inn. And in Russia the inns are not what they are in these parts. There
      the yards are roofed in and look like the ground floor, or let us say like
      barns in good farms. Only a barn would be a bit higher. So we put up there
      and were all right. My merchant was in a room, while I was with the
      horses, and everything was as it should be. So, lads, I said my prayers
      before going to sleep and began walking about the yard. And it was a dark
      night, I couldn’t see anything; it was no good trying. So I walked
      about a bit up to the waggons, or nearly, when I saw a light gleaming.
      What could it mean? I thought the people of the inn had gone to bed long
      ago, and besides the merchant and me there were no other guests in the
      inn. . . . Where could the light have come from? I felt suspicious. . . .
      I went closer . . . towards the light. . . . The Lord have mercy upon me!
      and save me, Queen of Heaven! I looked and there was a little window with
      a grating, . . . close to the ground, in the house. . . I lay down on the
      ground and looked in; as soon as I looked in a cold chill ran all down me.
      . . .”
    

      Kiruha, trying not to make a noise, thrust a handful of twigs into the
      fire. After waiting for it to leave off crackling and hissing, the old man
      went on:
    

      “I looked in and there was a big cellar, black and dark. . . . There
      was a lighted lantern on a tub. In the middle of the cellar were about a
      dozen men in red shirts with their sleeves turned up, sharpening long
      knives. . . . Ugh! So we had fallen into a nest of robbers. . . . What’s
      to be done? I ran to the merchant, waked him up quietly, and said: ‘Don’t
      be frightened, merchant,’ said I, ‘but we are in a bad way. We
      have fallen into a nest of robbers,’ I said. He turned pale and
      asked: ‘What are we to do now, Panteley? I have a lot of money that
      belongs to orphans. As for my life,’ he said, ‘that’s in
      God’s hands. I am not afraid to die, but it’s dreadful to lose
      the orphans’ money,’ said he. . . . What were we to do? The
      gates were locked; there was no getting out. If there had been a fence one
      could have climbed over it, but with the yard shut up! . . . ‘Come,
      don’t be frightened, merchant,’ said I; ‘but pray to
      God. Maybe the Lord will not let the orphans suffer. Stay still.’
      said I, ‘and make no sign, and meanwhile, maybe, I shall think of
      something. . . .’ Right! . . . I prayed to God and the Lord put the
      thought into my mind. . . . I clambered up on my chaise and softly, . . .
      softly so that no one should hear, began pulling out the straw in the
      thatch, made a hole and crept out, crept out. . . . Then I jumped off the
      roof and ran along the road as fast as I could. I ran and ran till I was
      nearly dead. . . . I ran maybe four miles without taking breath, if not
      more. Thank God I saw a village. I ran up to a hut and began tapping at a
      window. ‘Good Christian people,’ I said, and told them all
      about it, ‘do not let a Christian soul perish. . . .’ I waked
      them all up. . . . The peasants gathered together and went with me, . .
      one with a cord, one with an oakstick, others with pitchforks. . . . We
      broke in the gates of the inn-yard and went straight to the cellar. . . .
      And the robbers had just finished sharpening their knives and were going
      to kill the merchant. The peasants took them, every one of them, bound
      them and carried them to the police. The merchant gave them three hundred
      roubles in his joy, and gave me five gold pieces and put my name down.
      They said that they found human bones in the cellar afterwards, heaps and
      heaps of them. . . . Bones! . . . So they robbed people and then buried
      them, so that there should be no traces. . . . Well, afterwards they were
      punished at Morshansk.”
    

      Panteley had finished his story, and he looked round at his listeners.
      They were gazing at him in silence. The water was boiling by now and
      Styopka was skimming off the froth.
    

      “Is the fat ready?” Kiruha asked him in a whisper.
    

      “Wait a little. . . . Directly.”
    

      Styopka, his eyes fixed on Panteley as though he were afraid that the
      latter might begin some story before he was back, ran to the waggons; soon
      he came back with a little wooden bowl and began pounding some lard in it.
    

      “I went another journey with a merchant, too, . . .” Panteley
      went on again, speaking as before in a low voice and with fixed
      unbElinking eyes. “His name, as I remember now, was Pyotr
      Grigoritch. He was a nice man, . . . the merchant was. We stopped in the
      same way at an inn. . . . He indoors and me with the horses. . . . The
      people of the house, the innkeeper and his wife, seemed friendly good sort
      of people; the labourers, too, seemed all right; but yet, lads, I couldn’t
      sleep. I had a queer feeling in my heart, . . . a queer feeling, that was
      just it. The gates were open and there were plenty of people about, and
      yet I felt afraid and not myself. Everyone had been asleep long ago. It
      was the middle of the night; it would soon be time to get up, and I was
      lying alone in my chaise and could not close my eyes, as though I were
      some owl. And then, lads, I heard this sound, ‘Toop! toop! toop!’
      Someone was creeping up to the chaise. I poke my head out, and there was a
      peasant woman in nothing but her shift and with her feet bare. . . .
      ‘What do you want, good woman?’ I asked. And she was all of a
      tremble; her face was terror-stricken. . . ‘Get up, good man,’
      said she; ‘the people are plotting evil. . . . They mean to kill
      your merchant. With my own ears I heard the master whispering with his
      wife. . . .’ So it was not for nothing, the foreboding of my heart!
      ‘And who are you?’ I asked. ‘I am their cook,’ she
      said. . . . Right! . . . So I got out of the chaise and went to the
      merchant. I waked him up and said: ‘Things aren’t quite right,
      Pyotr Grigoritch. . . . Make haste and rouse yourself from sleep, your
      worship, and dress now while there is still time,’ I said; ‘and
      to save our skins, let us get away from trouble.’ He had no sooner
      begun dressing when the door opened and, mercy on us! I saw, Holy Mother!
      the innkeeper and his wife come into the room with three labourers. . . .
      So they had persuaded the labourers to join them. ‘The merchant has
      a lot of money, and we’ll go shares,’ they told them. Every
      one of the five had a long knife in their hand each a knife. The innkeeper
      locked the door and said: ‘Say your prayers, travellers, . . . and
      if you begin screaming,’ they said, ‘we won’t let you
      say your prayers before you die. . . .’ As though we could scream! I
      had such a lump in my throat I could not cry out. . . . The merchant wept
      and said: ‘Good Christian people! you have resolved to kill me
      because my money tempts you. Well, so be it; I shall not be the first nor
      shall I be the last. Many of us merchants have been murdered at inns. But
      why, good Christian brothers,’ says he, ‘murder my driver? Why
      should he have to suffer for my money?’ And he said that so
      pitifully! And the innkeeper answered him: ‘If we leave him alive,’
      said he, ‘he will be the first to bear witness against us. One may
      just as well kill two as one. You can but answer once for seven misdeeds.
      . . Say your prayers, that’s all you can do, and it is no good
      talking!’ The merchant and I knelt down side by side and wept and
      said our prayers. He thought of his children. I was young in those days; I
      wanted to live. . . . We looked at the images and prayed, and so pitifully
      that it brings a tear even now. . . . And the innkeeper’s wife looks
      at us and says: ‘Good people,’ said she, ‘don’t
      bear a grudge against us in the other world and pray to God for our
      punishment, for it is want that drives us to it.’ We prayed and wept
      and prayed and wept, and God heard us. He had pity on us, I suppose. . . .
      At the very minute when the innkeeper had taken the merchant by the beard
      to rip open his throat with his knife suddenly someone seemed to tap at
      the window from the yard! We all started, and the innkeeper’s hands
      dropped. . . . Someone was tapping at the window and shouting: ‘Pyotr
      Grigoritch,’ he shouted, ‘are you here? Get ready and let’s
      go!’ The people saw that someone had come for the merchant; they
      were terrified and took to their heels. . . . And we made haste into the
      yard, harnessed the horses, and were out of sight in a minute. . .”
    

      “Who was it knocked at the window?” asked Dymov.
    

      “At the window? It must have been a holy saint or angel, for there
      was no one else. . . . When we drove out of the yard there wasn’t a
      soul in the street. . . . It was the Lord’s doing.”
    

      Panteley told other stories, and in all of them “long knives”
      figured and all alike sounded made up. Had he heard these stories from
      someone else, or had he made them up himself in the remote past, and
      afterwards, as his memory grew weaker, mixed up his experiences with his
      imaginations and become unable to distinguish one from the other? Anything
      is possible, but it is strange that on this occasion and for the rest of
      the journey, whenever he happened to tell a story, he gave unmistakable
      preference to fiction, and never told of what he really had experienced.
      At the time Yegorushka took it all for the genuine thing, and believed
      every word; later on it seemed to him strange that a man who in his day
      had travelled all over Russia and seen and known so much, whose wife and
      children had been burnt to death, so failed to appreciate the wealth of
      his life that whenever he was sitting by the camp fire he was either
      silent or talked of what had never been.
    

      Over their porridge they were all silent, thinking of what they had just
      heard. Life is terrible and marvellous, and so, however terrible a story
      you tell in Russia, however you embroider it with nests of robbers, long
      knives and such marvels, it always finds an echo of reality in the soul of
      the listener, and only a man who has been a good deal affected by
      education looks askance distrustfully, and even he will be silent. The
      cross by the roadside, the dark bales of wool, the wide expanse of the
      plain, and the lot of the men gathered together by the camp fire—all
      this was of itself so marvellous and terrible that the fantastic colours
      of legend and fairy-tale were pale and blended with life.
    

      All the others ate out of the cauldron, but Panteley sat apart and ate his
      porridge out of a wooden bowl. His spoon was not like those the others
      had, but was made of cypress wood, with a little cross on it. Yegorushka,
      looking at him, thought of the little ikon glass and asked Styopka softly:
    

      “Why does Grandfather sit apart?”
    

      “He is an Old Believer,” Styopka and Vassya answered in a
      whisper. And as they said it they looked as though they were speaking of
      some secret vice or weakness.
    

      All sat silent, thinking. After the terrible stories there was no
      inclination to speak of ordinary things. All at once in the midst of the
      silence Vassya drew himself up and, fixing his lustreless eyes on one
      point, pricked up his ears.
    

      “What is it?” Dymov asked him.
    

      “Someone is coming,” answered Vassya.
    

      “Where do you see him?”
    

      “Yo-on-der! There’s something white. . .”
    

      There was nothing to be seen but darkness in the direction in which Vassya
      was looking; everyone listened, but they could hear no sound of steps.
    

      “Is he coming by the highroad?” asked Dymov.
    

      “No, over the open country. . . . He is coming this way.”
    

      A minute passed in silence.
    

      “And maybe it’s the merchant who was buried here walking over
      the steppe,” said Dymov.
    

      All looked askance at the cross, exchanged glances and suddenly broke into
      a laugh. They felt ashamed of their terror.
    

      “Why should he walk?” asked Panteley. “It’s only
      those walk at night whom the earth will not take to herself. And the
      merchants were all right. . . . The merchants have received the crown of
      martyrs.”
    

      But all at once they heard the sound of steps; someone was coming in
      haste.
    

      “He’s carrying something,” said Vassya.
    

      They could hear the grass rustling and the dry twigs crackling under the
      feet of the approaching wayfarer. But from the glare of the camp fire
      nothing could be seen. At last the steps sounded close by, and someone
      coughed. The flickering light seemed to part; a veil dropped from the
      waggoners’ eyes, and they saw a man facing them.
    

      Whether it was due to the flickering light or because everyone wanted to
      make out the man’s face first of all, it happened, strangely enough,
      that at the first glance at him they all saw, first of all, not his face
      nor his clothes, but his smile. It was an extraordinarily good-natured,
      broad, soft smile, like that of a baby on waking, one of those infectious
      smiles to which it is difficult not to respond by smiling too. The
      stranger, when they did get a good look at him, turned out to be a man of
      thirty, ugly and in no way remarkable. He was a tall Little Russian, with
      a long nose, long arms and long legs; everything about him seemed long
      except his neck, which was so short that it made him seem stooping. He was
      wearing a clean white shirt with an embroidered collar, white trousers,
      and new high boots, and in comparison with the waggoners he looked quite a
      dandy. In his arms he was carrying something big, white, and at the first
      glance strange-looking, and the stock of a gun also peeped out from behind
      his shoulder.
    

      Coming from the darkness into the circle of light, he stopped short as
      though petrified, and for half a minute looked at the waggoners as though
      he would have said: “Just look what a smile I have!”
    

      Then he took a step towards the fire, smiled still more radiantly and
      said:
    

      “Bread and salt, friends!”
    

      “You are very welcome!” Panteley answered for them all.
    

      The stranger put down by the fire what he was carrying in his arms —it
      was a dead bustard—and greeted them once more.
    

      They all went up to the bustard and began examining it.
    

      “A fine big bird; what did you kill it with?” asked Dymov.
    

      “Grape-shot. You can’t get him with small shot, he won’t
      let you get near enough. Buy it, friends! I will let you have it for
      twenty kopecks.”
    

      “What use would it be to us? It’s good roast, but I bet it
      would be tough boiled; you could not get your teeth into it. . . .”
    

      “Oh, what a pity! I would take it to the gentry at the farm; they
      would give me half a rouble for it. But it’s a long way to go—
      twelve miles!”
    

      The stranger sat down, took off his gun and laid it beside him.
    

      He seemed sleepy and languid; he sat smiling, and, screwing up his eyes at
      the firelight, apparently thinking of something very agreeable. They gave
      him a spoon; he began eating.
    

      “Who are you?” Dymov asked him.
    

      The stranger did not hear the question; he made no answer, and did not
      even glance at Dymov. Most likely this smiling man did not taste the
      flavour of the porridge either, for he seemed to eat it mechanically,
      lifting the spoon to his lips sometimes very full and sometimes quite
      empty. He was not drunk, but he seemed to have something nonsensical in
      his head.
    

      “I ask you who you are?” repeated Dymov.
    

      “I?” said the unknown, starting. “Konstantin Zvonik from
      Rovno. It’s three miles from here.”
    

      And anxious to show straight off that he was not quite an ordinary
      peasant, but something better, Konstantin hastened to add:
    

      “We keep bees and fatten pigs.”
    

      “Do you live with your father or in a house of your own?”
    

      “No; now I am living in a house of my own. I have parted. This
      month, just after St. Peter’s Day, I got married. I am a married man
      now! . . . It’s eighteen days since the wedding.”
    

      “That’s a good thing,” said Panteley. “Marriage is
      a good thing . . . . God’s blessing is on it.”
    

      “His young wife sits at home while he rambles about the steppe,”
      laughed Kiruha. “Queer chap!”
    

      As though he had been pinched on the tenderest spot, Konstantin started,
      laughed and flushed crimson.
    

      “But, Lord, she is not at home!” he said quickly, taking the
      spoon out of his mouth and looking round at everyone with an expression of
      delight and wonder. “She is not; she has gone to her mother’s
      for three days! Yes, indeed, she has gone away, and I feel as though I
      were not married. . . .”
    

      Konstantin waved his hand and turned his head; he wanted to go on
      thinking, but the joy which beamed in his face prevented him. As though he
      were not comfortable, he changed his attitude, laughed, and again waved
      his hand. He was ashamed to share his happy thoughts with strangers, but
      at the same time he had an irresistible longing to communicate his joy.
    

      “She has gone to Demidovo to see her mother,” he said,
      blushing and moving his gun. “She’ll be back to-morrow. . . .
      She said she would be back to dinner.”
    

      “And do you miss her?” said Dymov.
    

      “Oh, Lord, yes; I should think so. We have only been married such a
      little while, and she has gone away. . . . Eh! Oh, but she is a tricky
      one, God strike me dead! She is such a fine, splendid girl, such a one for
      laughing and singing, full of life and fire! When she is there your brain
      is in a whirl, and now she is away I wander about the steppe like a fool,
      as though I had lost something. I have been walking since dinner.”
    

      Konstantin rubbed his eyes, looked at the fire and laughed.
    

      “You love her, then, . . .” said Panteley.
    

      “She is so fine and splendid,” Konstantin repeated, not
      hearing him; “such a housewife, clever and sensible. You wouldn’t
      find another like her among simple folk in the whole province. She has
      gone away. . . . But she is missing me, I kno-ow! I know the little
      magpie. She said she would be back to-morrow by dinner-time. . . . And
      just think how queer!” Konstantin almost shouted, speaking a note
      higher and shifting his position. “Now she loves me and is sad
      without me, and yet she would not marry me.”
    

      “But eat,” said Kiruha.
    

      “She would not marry me,” Konstantin went on, not heeding him.
      “I have been struggling with her for three years! I saw her at the
      Kalatchik fair; I fell madly in love with her, was ready to hang myself. .
      . . I live at Rovno, she at Demidovo, more than twenty miles apart, and
      there was nothing I could do. I sent match-makers to her, and all she said
      was: ‘I won’t!’ Ah, the magpie! I sent her one thing and
      another, earrings and cakes, and twenty pounds of honey—but still
      she said: ‘I won’t!’ And there it was. If you come to
      think of it, I was not a match for her! She was young and lovely, full of
      fire, while I am old: I shall soon be thirty, and a regular beauty, too; a
      fine beard like a goat’s, a clear complexion all covered with
      pimples—how could I be compared with her! The only thing to be said
      is that we are well off, but then the Vahramenkys are well off, too. They’ve
      six oxen, and they keep a couple of labourers. I was in love, friends, as
      though I were plague-stricken. I couldn’t sleep or eat; my brain was
      full of thoughts, and in such a maze, Lord preserve us! I longed to see
      her, and she was in Demidovo. What do you think? God be my witness, I am
      not lying, three times a week I walked over there on foot just to have a
      look at her. I gave up my work! I was so frantic that I even wanted to get
      taken on as a labourer in Demidovo, so as to be near her. I was in misery!
      My mother called in a witch a dozen times; my father tried thrashing me.
      For three years I was in this torment, and then I made up my mind. ‘Damn
      my soul!’ I said. ‘I will go to the town and be a cabman. . .
      . It seems it is fated not to be.’ At Easter I went to Demidovo to
      have a last look at her. . . .”
    

      Konstantin threw back his head and went off into a mirthful tinkling
      laugh, as though he had just taken someone in very cleverly.
    

      “I saw her by the river with the lads,” he went on. “I
      was overcome with anger. . . . I called her aside and maybe for a full
      hour I said all manner of things to her. She fell in love with me! For
      three years she did not like me! she fell in love with me for what I said
      to her. . . .”
    

      “What did you say to her?” asked Dymov.
    

      “What did I say? I don’t remember. . . How could one remember?
      My words flowed at the time like water from a tap, without stopping to
      take breath. Ta-ta-ta! And now I can’t utter a word. . . . Well, so
      she married me. . . . She’s gone now to her mother’s, the
      magpie, and while she is away here I wander over the steppe. I can’t
      stay at home. It’s more than I can do!”
    

      Konstantin awkwardly released his feet, on which he was sitting, stretched
      himself on the earth, and propped his head in his fists, then got up and
      sat down again. Everyone by now thoroughly understood that he was in love
      and happy, poignantly happy; his smile, his eyes, and every movement,
      expressed fervent happiness. He could not find a place for himself, and
      did not know what attitude to take to keep himself from being overwhelmed
      by the multitude of his delightful thoughts. Having poured out his soul
      before these strangers, he settled down quietly at last, and, looking at
      the fire, sank into thought.
    

      At the sight of this happy man everyone felt depressed and longed to be
      happy, too. Everyone was dreamy. Dymov got up, walked about softly by the
      fire, and from his walk, from the movement of his shoulder-blades, it
      could be seen that he was weighed down by depression and yearning. He
      stood still for a moment, looked at Konstantin and sat down.
    

      The camp fire had died down by now; there was no flicker, and the patch of
      red had grown small and dim. . . . And as the fire went out the moonlight
      grew clearer and clearer. Now they could see the full width of the road,
      the bales of wool, the shafts of the waggons, the munching horses; on the
      further side of the road there was the dim outline of the second cross. .
      . .
    

      Dymov leaned his cheek on his hand and softly hummed some plaintive song.
      Konstantin smiled drowsily and chimed in with a thin voice. They sang for
      half a minute, then sank into silence. Emelyan started, jerked his elbows
      and wriggled his fingers.
    

      “Lads,” he said in an imploring voice, “let’s sing
      something sacred!” Tears came into his eyes. “Lads,” he
      repeated, pressing his hands on his heart, “let’s sing
      something sacred!”
    

      “I don’t know anything,” said Konstantin.
    

      Everyone refused, then Emelyan sang alone. He waved both arms, nodded his
      head, opened his mouth, but nothing came from his throat but a discordant
      gasp. He sang with his arms, with his head, with his eyes, even with the
      swelling on his face; he sang passionately with anguish, and the more he
      strained his chest to extract at least one note from it, the more
      discordant were his gasps.
    

      Yegorushka, like the rest, was overcome with depression. He went to his
      waggon, clambered up on the bales and lay down. He looked at the sky, and
      thought of happy Konstantin and his wife. Why did people get married? What
      were women in the world for? Yegorushka put the vague questions to
      himself, and thought that a man would certainly be happy if he had an
      affectionate, merry and beautiful woman continually living at his side.
      For some reason he remembered the Countess Dranitsky, and thought it would
      probably be very pleasant to live with a woman like that; he would perhaps
      have married her with pleasure if that idea had not been so shameful. He
      recalled her eyebrows, the pupils of her eyes, her carriage, the clock
      with the horseman. . . . The soft warm night moved softly down upon him
      and whispered something in his ear, and it seemed to him that it was that
      lovely woman bending over him, looking at him with a smile and meaning to
      kiss him. . . .
    

      Nothing was left of the fire but two little red eyes, which kept on
      growing smaller and smaller. Konstantin and the waggoners were sitting by
      it, dark motionless figures, and it seemed as though there were many more
      of them than before. The twin crosses were equally visible, and far, far
      away, somewhere by the highroad there gleamed a red light—other
      people cooking their porridge, most likely.
    

      “Our Mother Russia is the he-ad of all the world!” Kiruha sang
      out suddenly in a harsh voice, choked and subsided. The steppe echo caught
      up his voice, carried it on, and it seemed as though stupidity itself were
      rolling on heavy wheels over the steppe.
    

      “It’s time to go,” said Panteley. “Get up, lads.”
    

      While they were putting the horses in, Konstantin walked by the waggons
      and talked rapturously of his wife.
    

      “Good-bye, mates!” he cried when the waggons started. “Thank
      you for your hospitality. I shall go on again towards that light. It’s
      more than I can stand.”
    

      And he quickly vanished in the mist, and for a long time they could hear
      him striding in the direction of the light to tell those other strangers
      of his happiness.
    

      When Yegorushka woke up next day it was early morning; the sun had not yet
      risen. The waggons were at a standstill. A man in a white cap and a suit
      of cheap grey material, mounted on a little Cossack stallion, was talking
      to Dymov and Kiruha beside the foremost waggon. A mile and a half ahead
      there were long low white barns and little houses with tiled roofs; there
      were neither yards nor trees to be seen beside the little houses.
    

      “What village is that, Grandfather?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      “That’s the Armenian Settlement, youngster,” answered
      Panteley. “The Armenians live there. They are a good sort of people,
      . . . the Arnienians are.”
    

      The man in grey had finished talking to Dymov and Kiruha; he pulled up his
      little stallion and looked across towards the settlement.
    

      “What a business, only think!” sighed Panteley, looking
      towards the settlement, too, and shuddering at the morning freshness.
      “He has sent a man to the settlement for some papers, and he doesn’t
      come . . . . He should have sent Styopka.”
    

      “Who is that, Grandfather?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      “Varlamov.”
    

      My goodness! Yegorushka jumped up quickly, getting upon his knees, and
      looked at the white cap. It was hard to recognize the mysterious elusive
      Varlamov, who was sought by everyone, who was always “on his rounds,”
      and who had far more money than Countess Dranitsky, in the short, grey
      little man in big boots, who was sitting on an ugly little nag and talking
      to peasants at an hour when all decent people were asleep.
    

      “He is all right, a good man,” said Panteley, looking towards
      the settlement. “God give him health—a splendid gentleman,
      Semyon Alexandritch. . . . It’s people like that the earth rests
      upon. That’s true. . . . The cocks are not crowing yet, and he is
      already up and about. . . . Another man would be asleep, or gallivanting
      with visitors at home, but he is on the steppe all day, . . . on his
      rounds. . . . He does not let things slip. . . . No-o! He’s a fine
      fellow. . .”
    

      Varlamov was talking about something, while he kept his eyes fixed. The
      little stallion shifted from one leg to another impatiently.
    

      “Semyon Alexandritch!” cried Panteley, taking off his hat.
      “Allow us to send Styopka! Emelyan, call out that Styopka should be
      sent.”
    

      But now at last a man on horseback could be seen coming from the
      settlement. Bending very much to one side and brandishing his whip above
      his head like a gallant young Caucasian, and wanting to astonish everyone
      by his horsemanship, he flew towards the waggons with the swiftness of a
      bird.
    

      “That must be one of his circuit men,” said Panteley. “He
      must have a hundred such horsemen or maybe more.”
    

      Reaching the first waggon, he pulled up his horse, and taking off his hat,
      handed Varlamov a little book. Varlamov took several papers out of the
      book, read them and cried:
    

      “And where is Ivantchuk’s letter?”
    

      The horseman took the book back, looked at the papers and shrugged his
      shoulders. He began saying something, probably justifying himself and
      asking to be allowed to ride back to the settlement again. The little
      stallion suddenly stirred as though Varlamov had grown heavier. Varlamov
      stirred too.
    

      “Go along!” he cried angrily, and he waved his whip at the
      man.
    

      Then he turned his horse round and, looking through the papers in the
      book, moved at a walking pace alongside the waggons. When he reached the
      hindmost, Yegorushka strained his eyes to get a better look at him.
      Varlamov was an elderly man. His face, a simple Russian sunburnt face with
      a small grey beard, was red, wet with dew and covered with little blue
      veins; it had the same expression of businesslike coldness as Ivan
      Ivanitch’s face, the same look of fanatical zeal for business. But
      yet what a difference could be felt between him and Kuzmitchov! Uncle Ivan
      Ivanitch always had on his face, together with his business-like reserve,
      a look of anxiety and apprehension that he would not find Varlamov, that
      he would be late, that he would miss a good price; nothing of that sort,
      so characteristic of small and dependent persons, could be seen in the
      face or figure of Varlamov. This man made the price himself, was not
      looking for anyone, and did not depend on anyone; however ordinary his
      exterior, yet in everything, even in the manner of holding his whip, there
      was a sense of power and habitual authority over the steppe.
    

      As he rode by Yegorushka he did not glance at him. Only the little
      stallion deigned to notice Yegorushka; he looked at him with his large
      foolish eyes, and even he showed no interest. Panteley bowed to Varlamov;
      the latter noticed it, and without taking his eyes off the sheets of
      paper, said lisping:
    

      “How are you, old man?”
    

      Varlamov’s conversation with the horseman and the way he had
      brandished his whip had evidently made an overwhelming impression on the
      whole party. Everyone looked grave. The man on horseback, cast down at the
      anger of the great man, remained stationary, with his hat off, and the
      rein loose by the foremost waggon; he was silent, and seemed unable to
      grasp that the day had begun so badly for him.
    

      “He is a harsh old man, . .” muttered Panteley. “It’s
      a pity he is so harsh! But he is all right, a good man. . . . He doesn’t
      abuse men for nothing. . . . It’s no matter. . . .”
    

      After examining the papers, Varlamov thrust the book into his pocket; the
      little stallion, as though he knew what was in his mind, without waiting
      for orders, started and dashed along the highroad.
    

      VII
    

      On the following night the waggoners had halted and were cooking their
      porridge. On this occasion there was a sense of overwhelming oppression
      over everyone. It was sultry; they all drank a great deal, but could not
      quench their thirst. The moon was intensely crimson and sullen, as though
      it were sick. The stars, too, were sullen, the mist was thicker, the
      distance more clouded. Nature seemed as though languid and weighed down by
      some foreboding.
    

      There was not the same liveliness and talk round the camp fire as there
      had been the day before. All were dreary and spoke listlessly and without
      interest. Panteley did nothing but sigh and complain of his feet, and
      continually alluded to impenitent deathbeds.
    

      Dymov was lying on his stomach, chewing a straw in silence; there was an
      expression of disgust on his face as though the straw smelt unpleasant, a
      spiteful and exhausted look. . . . Vassya complained that his jaw ached,
      and prophesied bad weather; Emelyan was not waving his arms, but sitting
      still and looking gloomily at the fire. Yegorushka, too, was weary. This
      slow travelling exhausted him, and the sultriness of the day had given him
      a headache.
    

      While they were cooking the porridge, Dymov, to relieve his boredom, began
      quarrelling with his companions.
    

      “Here he lolls, the lumpy face, and is the first to put his spoon
      in,” he said, looking spitefully at Emelyan. “Greedy! always
      contrives to sit next the cauldron. He’s been a church-singer, so he
      thinks he is a gentleman! There are a lot of singers like you begging
      along the highroad!”
    

      “What are you pestering me for?” asked Emelyan, looking at him
      angrily.
    

      “To teach you not to be the first to dip into the cauldron. Don’t
      think too much of yourself!”
    

      “You are a fool, and that is all about it!” wheezed out
      Emelyan.
    

      Knowing by experience how such conversations usually ended, Panteley and
      Vassya intervened and tried to persuade Dymov not to quarrel about
      nothing.
    

      “A church-singer!” The bully would not desist, but laughed
      contemptuously. “Anyone can sing like that—sit in the church
      porch and sing ‘Give me alms, for Christ’s sake!’ Ugh!
      you are a nice fellow!”
    

      Emelyan did not speak. His silence had an irritating effect on Dymov. He
      looked with still greater hatred at the ex-singer and said:
    

      “I don’t care to have anything to do with you, or I would show
      you what to think of yourself.”
    

      “But why are you pushing me, you Mazeppa?” Emelyan cried,
      flaring up. “Am I interfering with you?”
    

      “What did you call me?” asked Dymov, drawing himself up, and
      his eyes were suffused with blood. “Eh! I am a Mazeppa? Yes? Take
      that, then; go and look for it.”
    

      Dymov snatched the spoon out of Emelyan’s hand and flung it far
      away. Kiruha, Vassya, and Styopka ran to look for it, while Emelyan fixed
      an imploring and questioning look on Panteley. His face suddenly became
      small and wrinkled; it began twitching, and the ex-singer began to cry
      like a child.
    

      Yegorushka, who had long hated Dymov, felt as though the air all at once
      were unbearably stifling, as though the fire were scorching his face; he
      longed to run quickly to the waggons in the darkness, but the bully’s
      angry bored eyes drew the boy to him. With a passionate desire to say
      something extremely offensive, he took a step towards Dymov and brought
      out, gasping for breath:
    

      “You are the worst of the lot; I can’t bear you!”
    

      After this he ought to have run to the waggons, but he could not stir from
      the spot and went on:
    

      “In the next world you will burn in hell! I’ll complain to
      Ivan Ivanitch. Don’t you dare insult Emelyan!”
    

      “Say this too, please,” laughed Dyrnov: “‘every
      little sucking-pig wants to lay down the law.’ Shall I pull your
      ear?”
    

      Yegorushka felt that he could not breathe; and something which had never
      happened to him before—he suddenly began shaking all over, stamping
      his feet and crying shrilly:
    

      “Beat him, beat him!”
    

      Tears gushed from his eyes; he felt ashamed, and ran staggering back to
      the waggon. The effect produced by his outburst he did not see. Lying on
      the bales and twitching his arms and legs, he whispered:
    

      “Mother, mother!”
    

      And these men and the shadows round the camp fire, and the dark bales and
      the far-away lightning, which was flashing every minute in the distance—all
      struck him now as terrible and unfriendly. He was overcome with terror and
      asked himself in despair why and how he had come into this unknown land in
      the company of terrible peasants? Where was his uncle now, where was
      Father Christopher, where was Deniska? Why were they so long in coming?
      Hadn’t they forgotten him? At the thought that he was forgotten and
      cast out to the mercy of fate, he felt such a cold chill of dread that he
      had several times an impulse to jump off the bales of wool, and run back
      full speed along the road; but the thought of the huge dark crosses, which
      would certainly meet him on the way, and the lightning flashing in the
      distance, stopped him. . . . And only when he whispered, “Mother,
      mother!” he felt as it were a little better.
    

      The waggoners must have been full of dread, too. After Yegorushka had run
      away from the camp fire they sat at first for a long time in silence, then
      they began speaking in hollow undertones about something, saying that it
      was coming and that they must make haste and get away from it. . . . They
      quickly finished supper, put out the fire and began harnessing the horses
      in silence. From their fluster and the broken phrases they uttered it was
      apparent they foresaw some trouble. Before they set off on their way,
      Dymov went up to Panteley and asked softly:
    

      “What’s his name?”
    

      “Yegory,” answered Panteley.
    

      Dymov put one foot on the wheel, caught hold of the cord which was tied
      round the bales and pulled himself up. Yegorushka saw his face and curly
      head. The face was pale and looked grave and exhausted, but there was no
      expression of spite in it.
    

      “Yera!” he said softly, “here, hit me!”
    

      Yegorushka looked at him in surprise. At that instant there was a flash of
      lightning.
    

      “It’s all right, hit me,” repeated Dymov. And without
      waiting for Yegorushka to hit him or to speak to him, he jumped down and
      said: “How dreary I am!”
    

      Then, swaying from one leg to the other and moving his shoulder-blades, he
      sauntered lazily alongside the string of waggons and repeated in a voice
      half weeping, half angry:
    

      “How dreary I am! O Lord! Don’t you take offence, Emelyan,”
      he said as he passed Emelyan. “Ours is a wretched cruel life!”
    

      There was a flash of lightning on the right, and, like a reflection in the
      looking-glass, at once a second flash in the distance.
    

      “Yegory, take this,” cried Panteley, throwing up something big
      and dark.
    

      “What is it?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      “A mat. There will be rain, so cover yourself up.”
    

      Yegorushka sat up and looked about him. The distance had grown perceptibly
      blacker, and now oftener than every minute winked with a pale light. The
      blackness was being bent towards the right as though by its own weight.
    

      “Will there be a storm, Grandfather?” asked Yegorushka.
    

      “Ah, my poor feet, how they ache!” Panteley said in a
      high-pitched voice, stamping his feet and not hearing the boy.
    

      On the left someone seemed to strike a match in the sky; a pale
      phosphorescent streak gleamed and went out. There was a sound as though
      someone very far away were walking over an iron roof, probably barefoot,
      for the iron gave a hollow rumble.
    

      “It’s set in!” cried Kiruha.
    

      Between the distance and the horizon on the right there was a flash of
      lightning so vivid that it lighted up part of the steppe and the spot
      where the clear sky met the blackness. A terrible cloud was swooping down,
      without haste, a compact mass; big black shreds hung from its edge;
      similar shreds pressing one upon another were piling up on the right and
      left horizon. The tattered, ragged look of the storm-cloud gave it a
      drunken disorderly air. There was a distinct, not smothered, growl of
      thunder. Yegorushka crossed himself and began quickly putting on his
      great-coat.
    

      “I am dreary!” Dymov’s shout floated from the foremost
      waggon, and it could be told from his voice that he was beginning to be
      ill-humoured again. “I am so dreary!”
    

      All at once there was a squall of wind, so violent that it almost snatched
      away Yegorushka’s bundle and mat; the mat fluttered in all
      directions and flapped on the bale and on Yegorushka’s face. The
      wind dashed whistling over the steppe, whirled round in disorder and
      raised such an uproar from the grass that neither the thunder nor the
      creaking of the wheels could be heard; it blew from the black storm-cloud,
      carrying with it clouds of dust and the scent of rain and wet earth. The
      moonlight grew mistier, as it were dirtier; the stars were even more
      overcast; and clouds of dust could be seen hurrying along the edge of the
      road, followed by their shadows. By now, most likely, the whirlwind
      eddying round and lifting from the earth dust, dry grass and feathers, was
      mounting to the very sky; uprooted plants must have been flying by that
      very black storm-cloud, and how frightened they must have been! But
      through the dust that clogged the eyes nothing could be seen but the flash
      of lightning.
    

      Yegorushka, thinking it would pour with rain in a minute, knelt up and
      covered himself with the mat.
    

      “Panteley-ey!” someone shouted in the front. “A. . . a.
      . . va!”
    

      “I can’t!” Panteley answered in a loud high voice.
      “A . . . a . . . va! Arya . . . a!”
    

      There was an angry clap of thunder, which rolled across the sky from right
      to left, then back again, and died away near the foremost waggon.
    

      “Holy, holy, holy, Lord of Sabaoth,” whispered Yegorushka,
      crossing himself. “Fill heaven and earth with Thy glory.”
    

      The blackness in the sky yawned wide and breathed white fire. At once
      there was another clap of thunder. It had scarcely ceased when there was a
      flash of lightning so broad that Yegorushka suddenly saw through a slit in
      the mat the whole highroad to the very horizon, all the waggoners and even
      Kiruha’s waistcoat. The black shreds had by now moved upwards from
      the left, and one of them, a coarse, clumsy monster like a claw with
      fingers, stretched to the moon. Yegorushka made up his mind to shut his
      eyes tight, to pay no attention to it, and to wait till it was all over.
    

      The rain was for some reason long in coming. Yegorushka peeped out from
      the mat in the hope that perhaps the storm-cloud was passing over. It was
      fearfully dark. Yegorushka could see neither Panteley, nor the bale of
      wool, nor himself; he looked sideways towards the place where the moon had
      lately been, but there was the same black darkness there as over the
      waggons. And in the darkness the flashes of lightning seemed more violent
      and blinding, so that they hurt his eyes.
    

      “Panteley!” called Yegorushka.
    

      No answer followed. But now a gust of wind for the last time flung up the
      mat and hurried away. A quiet regular sound was heard. A big cold drop
      fell on Yegorushka’s knee, another trickled over his hand. He
      noticed that his knees were not covered, and tried to rearrange the mat,
      but at that moment something began pattering on the road, then on the
      shafts and the bales. It was the rain. As though they understood one
      another, the rain and the mat began prattling of something rapidly, gaily
      and most annoyingly like two magpies.
    

      Yegorushka knelt up or rather squatted on his boots. While the rain was
      pattering on the mat, he leaned forward to screen his knees, which were
      suddenly wet. He succeeded in covering his knees, but in less than a
      minute was aware of a penetrating, unpleasant dampness behind on his back
      and the calves of his legs. He returned to his former position, exposing
      his knees to the rain, and wondered what to do to rearrange the mat which
      he could not see in the darkness. But his arms were already wet, the water
      was trickling up his sleeves and down his collar, and his shoulder-blades
      felt chilly. And he made up his mind to do nothing but sit motionless and
      wait till it was all over.
    

      “Holy, holy, holy!” he whispered.
    

      Suddenly, exactly over his head, the sky cracked with a fearful deafening
      din; he huddled up and held his breath, waiting for the fragments to fall
      upon his head and back. He inadvertently opened his eyes and saw a
      blinding intense light flare out and flash five times on his fingers, his
      wet sleeves, and on the trickles of water running from the mat upon the
      bales and down to the ground. There was a fresh peal of thunder as violent
      and awful; the sky was not growling and rumbling now, but uttering short
      crashing sounds like the crackling of dry wood.
    

      “Trrah! tah! tah! tah!” the thunder rang out distinctly,
      rolled over the sky, seemed to stumble, and somewhere by the foremost
      waggons or far behind to fall with an abrupt angry “Trrra!”
    

      The flashes of lightning had at first been only terrible, but with such
      thunder they seemed sinister and menacing. Their magic light pierced
      through closed eyelids and sent a chill all over the body. What could he
      do not to see them? Yegorushka made up his mind to turn over on his face.
      Cautiously, as though afraid of being watched, he got on all fours, and
      his hands slipping on the wet bale, he turned back again.
    

      “Trrah! tah! tah!” floated over his head, rolled under the
      waggons and exploded “Kraa!”
    

      Again he inadvertently opened his eyes and saw a new danger: three huge
      giants with long pikes were following the waggon! A flash of lightning
      gleamed on the points of their pikes and lighted up their figures very
      distinctly. They were men of huge proportions, with covered faces, bowed
      heads, and heavy footsteps. They seemed gloomy and dispirited and lost in
      thought. Perhaps they were not following the waggons with any harmful
      intent, and yet there was something awful in their proximity.
    

      Yegorushka turned quickly forward, and trembling all over cried: “Panteley!
      Grandfather!”
    

      “Trrah! tah! tah!” the sky answered him.
    

      He opened his eyes to see if the waggoners were there. There were flashes
      of lightning in two places, which lighted up the road to the far distance,
      the whole string of waggons and all the waggoners. Streams of water were
      flowing along the road and bubbles were dancing. Panteley was walking
      beside the waggon; his tall hat and his shoulder were covered with a small
      mat; his figure expressed neither terror nor uneasiness, as though he were
      deafened by the thunder and blinded by the lightning.
    

      “Grandfather, the giants!” Yegorushka shouted to him in tears.
    

      But the old man did not hear. Further away walked Emelyan. He was covered
      from head to foot with a big mat and was triangular in shape. Vassya,
      without anything over him, was walking with the same wooden step as usual,
      lifting his feet high and not bending his knees. In the flash of lightning
      it seemed as though the waggons were not moving and the men were
      motionless, that Vassya’s lifted foot was rigid in the same
      position. . . .
    

      Yegorushka called the old man once more. Getting no answer, he sat
      motionless, and no longer waited for it all to end. He was convinced that
      the thunder would kill him in another minute, that he would accidentally
      open his eyes and see the terrible giants, and he left off crossing
      himself, calling the old man and thinking of his mother, and was simply
      numb with cold and the conviction that the storm would never end.
    

      But at last there was the sound of voices.
    

      “Yegory, are you asleep?” Panteley cried below. “Get
      down! Is he deaf, the silly little thing? . . .”
    

      “Something like a storm!” said an unfamiliar bass voice, and
      the stranger cleared his throat as though he had just tossed off a good
      glass of vodka.
    

      Yegorushka opened his eyes. Close to the waggon stood Panteley, Emelyan,
      looking like a triangle, and the giants. The latter were by now much
      shorter, and when Yegorushka looked more closely at them they turned out
      to be ordinary peasants, carrying on their shoulders not pikes but
      pitchforks. In the space between Panteley and the triangular figure,
      gleamed the window of a low-pitched hut. So the waggons were halting in
      the village. Yegorushka flung off the mat, took his bundle and made haste
      to get off the waggon. Now when close to him there were people talking and
      a lighted window he no longer felt afraid, though the thunder was crashing
      as before and the whole sky was streaked with lightning.
    

      “It was a good storm, all right, . . .” Panteley was
      muttering. “Thank God, . . . my feet are a little softened by the
      rain. It was all right. . . . Have you got down, Yegory? Well, go into the
      hut; it is all right. . . .”
    

      “Holy, holy, holy!” wheezed Emelyan, “it must have
      struck something . . . . Are you of these parts?” he asked the
      giants.
    

      “No, from Glinovo. We belong to Glinovo. We are working at the
      Platers’.”
    

      “Threshing?”
    

      “All sorts. Just now we are getting in the wheat. The lightning, the
      lightning! It is long since we have had such a storm. . . .”
    

      Yegorushka went into the hut. He was met by a lean hunchbacked old woman
      with a sharp chin. She stood holding a tallow candle in her hands,
      screwing up her eyes and heaving prolonged sighs.
    

      “What a storm God has sent us!” she said. “And our lads
      are out for the night on the steppe; they’ll have a bad time, poor
      dears! Take off your things, little sir, take off your things.”
    

      Shivering with cold and shrugging squeamishly, Yegorushka pulled off his
      drenched overcoat, then stretched out his arms and straddled his legs, and
      stood a long time without moving. The slightest movement caused an
      unpleasant sensation of cold and wetness. His sleeves and the back of his
      shirt were sopped, his trousers stuck to his legs, his head was dripping.
    

      “What’s the use of standing there, with your legs apart,
      little lad?” said the old woman. “Come, sit down.”
    

      Holding his legs wide apart, Yegorushka went up to the table and sat down
      on a bench near somebody’s head. The head moved, puffed a stream of
      air through its nose, made a chewing sound and subsided. A mound covered
      with a sheepskin stretched from the head along the bench; it was a peasant
      woman asleep.
    

      The old woman went out sighing, and came back with a big water melon and a
      little sweet melon.
    

      “Have something to eat, my dear! I have nothing else to offer you, .
      . .” she said, yawning. She rummaged in the table and took out a
      long sharp knife, very much like the one with which the brigands killed
      the merchants in the inn. “Have some, my dear!”
    

      Yegorushka, shivering as though he were in a fever, ate a slice of sweet
      melon with black bread and then a slice of water melon, and that made him
      feel colder still.
    

      “Our lads are out on the steppe for the night, . . .” sighed
      the old woman while he was eating. “The terror of the Lord! I’d
      light the candle under the ikon, but I don’t know where Stepanida
      has put it. Have some more, little sir, have some more. . . .”
    

      The old woman gave a yawn and, putting her right hand behind her,
      scratched her left shoulder.
    

      “It must be two o’clock now,” she said; “it will
      soon be time to get up. Our lads are out on the steppe for the night; they
      are all wet through for sure. . . .”
    

      “Granny,” said Yegorushka. “I am sleepy.”
    

      “Lie down, my dear, lie down,” the old woman sighed, yawning.
      “Lord Jesus Christ! I was asleep, when I heard a noise as though
      someone were knocking. I woke up and looked, and it was the storm God had
      sent us. . . . I’d have lighted the candle, but I couldn’t
      find it.”
    

      Talking to herself, she pulled some rags, probably her own bed, off the
      bench, took two sheepskins off a nail by the stove, and began laying them
      out for a bed for Yegorushka. “The storm doesn’t grow less,”
      she muttered. “If only nothing’s struck in an unlucky hour.
      Our lads are out on the steppe for the night. Lie down and sleep, my dear.
      . . . Christ be with you, my child. . . . I won’t take away the
      melon; maybe you’ll have a bit when you get up.”
    

      The sighs and yawns of the old woman, the even breathing of the sleeping
      woman, the half-darkness of the hut, and the sound of the rain outside,
      made one sleepy. Yegorushka was shy of undressing before the old woman. He
      only took off his boots, lay down and covered himself with the sheepskin.
    

      “Is the little lad lying down?” he heard Panteley whisper a
      little later.
    

      “Yes,” answered the old woman in a whisper. “The terror
      of the Lord! It thunders and thunders, and there is no end to it.”
    

      “It will soon be over,” wheezed Panteley, sitting down;
      “it’s getting quieter. . . . The lads have gone into the huts,
      and two have stayed with the horses. The lads have. . . . They can’t;
      . . . the horses would be taken away. . . . I’ll sit here a bit and
      then go and take my turn. . . . We can’t leave them; they would be
      taken. . . .”
    

      Panteley and the old woman sat side by side at Yegorushka’s feet,
      talking in hissing whispers and interspersing their speech with sighs and
      yawns. And Yegorushka could not get warm. The warm heavy sheepskin lay on
      him, but he was trembling all over; his arms and legs were twitching, and
      his whole inside was shivering. . . . He undressed under the sheepskin,
      but that was no good. His shivering grew more and more acute.
    

      Panteley went out to take his turn with the horses, and afterwards came
      back again, and still Yegorushka was shivering all over and could not get
      to sleep. Something weighed upon his head and chest and oppressed him, and
      he did not know what it was, whether it was the old people whispering, or
      the heavy smell of the sheepskin. The melon he had eaten had left an
      unpleasant metallic taste in his mouth. Moreover he was being bitten by
      fleas.
    

      “Grandfather, I am cold,” he said, and did not know his own
      voice.
    

      “Go to sleep, my child, go to sleep,” sighed the old woman.
    

      Tit came up to the bedside on his thin little legs and waved his arms,
      then grew up to the ceiling and turned into a windmill. . . . Father
      Christopher, not as he was in the chaise, but in his full vestments with
      the sprinkler in his hand, walked round the mill, sprinkling it with holy
      water, and it left off waving. Yegorushka, knowing this was delirium,
      opened his eyes.
    

      “Grandfather,” he called, “give me some water.”
    

      No one answered. Yegorushka felt it insufferably stifling and
      uncomfortable lying down. He got up, dressed, and went out of the hut.
      Morning was beginning. The sky was overcast, but it was no longer raining.
      Shivering and wrapping himself in his wet overcoat, Yegorushka walked
      about the muddy yard and listened to the silence; he caught sight of a
      little shed with a half-open door made of reeds. He looked into this shed,
      went into it, and sat down in a dark corner on a heap of dry dung.
    

      There was a tangle of thoughts in his heavy head; his mouth was dry and
      unpleasant from the metallic taste. He looked at his hat, straightened the
      peacock’s feather on it, and thought how he had gone with his mother
      to buy the hat. He put his hand into his pocket and took out a lump of
      brownish sticky paste. How had that paste come into his pocket? He thought
      a minute, smelt it; it smelt of honey. Aha! it was the Jewish cake! How
      sopped it was, poor thing!
    

      Yegorushka examined his coat. It was a little grey overcoat with big bone
      buttons, cut in the shape of a frock-coat. At home, being a new and
      expensive article, it had not been hung in the hall, but with his mother’s
      dresses in her bedroom; he was only allowed to wear it on holidays.
      Looking at it, Yegorushka felt sorry for it. He thought that he and the
      great-coat were both abandoned to the mercy of destiny; he thought that he
      would never get back home, and began sobbing so violently that he almost
      fell off the heap of dung.
    

      A big white dog with woolly tufts like curl-papers about its face, sopping
      from the rain, came into the shed and stared with curiosity at Yegorushka.
      It seemed to be hesitating whether to bark or not. Deciding that there was
      no need to bark, it went cautiously up to Yegorushka, ate the sticky
      plaster and went out again.
    

      “There are Varlamov’s men!” someone shouted in the
      street.
    

      After having his cry out, Yegorushka went out of the shed and, walking
      round a big puddle, made his way towards the street. The waggons were
      standing exactly opposite the gateway. The drenched waggoners, with their
      muddy feet, were sauntering beside them or sitting on the shafts, as
      listless and drowsy as flies in autumn. Yegorushka looked at them and
      thought: “How dreary and comfortless to be a peasant!” He went
      up to Panteley and sat down beside him on the shaft.
    

      “Grandfather, I’m cold,” he said, shivering and
      thrusting his hands up his sleeves.
    

      “Never mind, we shall soon be there,” yawned Panteley. “Never
      mind, you will get warm.”
    

      It must have been early when the waggons set off, for it was not hot.
      Yegorushka lay on the bales of wool and shivered with cold, though the sun
      soon came out and dried his clothes, the bales, and the earth. As soon as
      he closed his eyes he saw Tit and the windmill again. Feeling a sickness
      and heaviness all over, he did his utmost to drive away these images, but
      as soon as they vanished the dare-devil Dymov, with red eyes and lifted
      fists, rushed at Yegorushka with a roar, or there was the sound of his
      complaint: “I am so dreary!” Varlamov rode by on his little
      Cossack stallion; happy Konstantin passed, with a smile and the bustard in
      his arms. And how tedious these people were, how sickening and unbearable!
    

      Once—it was towards evening—he raised his head to ask for
      water. The waggons were standing on a big bridge across a broad river.
      There was black smoke below over the river, and through it could be seen a
      steamer with a barge in tow. Ahead of them, beyond the river, was a huge
      mountain dotted with houses and churches; at the foot of the mountain an
      engine was being shunted along beside some goods trucks.
    

      Yegorushka had never before seen steamers, nor engines, nor broad rivers.
      Glancing at them now, he was not alarmed or surprised; there was not even
      a look of anything like curiosity in his face. He merely felt sick, and
      made haste to turn over to the edge of the bale. He was sick. Panteley,
      seeing this, cleared his throat and shook his head.
    

      “Our little lad’s taken ill,” he said. “He must
      have got a chill to the stomach. The little lad must. . . away from home;
      it’s a bad lookout!”
    

      VIII
    

      The waggons stopped at a big inn for merchants, not far from the quay. As
      Yegorushka climbed down from the waggon he heard a very familiar voice.
      Someone was helping him to get down, and saying:
    

      “We arrived yesterday evening. . . . We have been expecting you all
      day. We meant to overtake you yesterday, but it was out of our way; we
      came by the other road. I say, how you have crumpled your coat! You’ll
      catch it from your uncle!”
    

      Yegorushka looked into the speaker’s mottled face and remembered
      that this was Deniska.
    

      “Your uncle and Father Christopher are in the inn now, drinking tea;
      come along!”
    

      And he led Yegorushka to a big two-storied building, dark and gloomy like
      the almshouse at N. After going across the entry, up a dark staircase and
      through a narrow corridor, Yegorushka and Deniska reached a little room in
      which Ivan Ivanitch and Father Christopher were sitting at the tea-table.
      Seeing the boy, both the old men showed surprise and pleasure.
    

      “Aha! Yegor Ni-ko-la-aitch!” chanted Father Christopher.
      “Mr. Lomonosov!”
    

      “Ah, our gentleman that is to be,” said Kuzmitchov, “pleased
      to see you!”
    

      Yegorushka took off his great-coat, kissed his uncle’s hand and
      Father Christopher’s, and sat down to the table.
    

      “Well, how did you like the journey, puer bone?” Father
      Christopher pelted him with questions as he poured him out some tea, with
      his radiant smile. “Sick of it, I’ve no doubt? God save us all
      from having to travel by waggon or with oxen. You go on and on, God
      forgive us; you look ahead and the steppe is always lying stretched out
      the same as it was—you can’t see the end of it! It’s not
      travelling but regular torture. Why don’t you drink your tea? Drink
      it up; and in your absence, while you have been trailing along with the
      waggons, we have settled all our business capitally. Thank God we have
      sold our wool to Tcherepahin, and no one could wish to have done better. .
      . . We have made a good bargain.”
    

      At the first sight of his own people Yegorushka felt an overwhelming
      desire to complain. He did not listen to Father Christopher, but thought
      how to begin and what exactly to complain of. But Father Christopher’s
      voice, which seemed to him harsh and unpleasant, prevented him from
      concentrating his attention and confused his thoughts. He had not sat at
      the table five minutes before he got up, went to the sofa and lay down.
    

      “Well, well,” said Father Christopher in surprise. “What
      about your tea?”
    

      Still thinking what to complain of, Yegorushka leaned his head against the
      wall and broke into sobs.
    

      “Well, well!” repeated Father Christopher, getting up and
      going to the sofa. “Yegory, what is the matter with you? Why are you
      crying?”
    

      “I’m . . . I’m ill,” Yegorushka brought out.
    

      “Ill?” said Father Christopher in amazement. “That’s
      not the right thing, my boy. . . . One mustn’t be ill on a journey.
      Aie, aie, what are you thinking about, boy . . . eh?”
    

      He put his hand to Yegorushka’s head, touched his cheek and said:
    

      “Yes, your head’s feverish. . . . You must have caught cold or
      else have eaten something. . . . Pray to God.”
    

      “Should we give him quinine? . . .” said Ivan Ivanitch,
      troubled.
    

      “No; he ought to have something hot. . . . Yegory, have a little
      drop of soup? Eh?”
    

      “I . . . don’t want any,” said Yegorushka.
    

      “Are you feeling chilly?”
    

      “I was chilly before, but now . . . now I am hot. And I ache all
      over. . . .”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch went up to the sofa, touched Yegorushka on the head, cleared
      his throat with a perplexed air, and went back to the table.
    

      “I tell you what, you undress and go to bed,” said Father
      Christopher. “What you want is sleep now.”
    

      He helped Yegorushka to undress, gave him a pillow and covered him with a
      quilt, and over that Ivan Ivanitch’s great-coat. Then he walked away
      on tiptoe and sat down to the table. Yegorushka shut his eyes, and at once
      it seemed to him that he was not in the hotel room, but on the highroad
      beside the camp fire. Emelyan waved his hands, and Dymov with red eyes lay
      on his stomach and looked mockingly at Yegorushka.
    

      “Beat him, beat him!” shouted Yegorushka.
    

      “He is delirious,” said Father Christopher in an undertone.
    

      “It’s a nuisance!” sighed Ivan Ivanitch.
    

      “He must be rubbed with oil and vinegar. Please God, he will be
      better to-morrow.”
    

      To be rid of bad dreams, Yegorushka opened his eyes and began looking
      towards the fire. Father Christopher and Ivan Ivanitch had now finished
      their tea and were talking in a whisper. The first was smiling with
      delight, and evidently could not forget that he had made a good bargain
      over his wool; what delighted him was not so much the actual profit he had
      made as the thought that on getting home he would gather round him his big
      family, wink slyly and go off into a chuckle; at first he would deceive
      them all, and say that he had sold the wool at a price below its value,
      then he would give his son-in-law, Mihail, a fat pocket-book and say:
      “Well, take it! that’s the way to do business!”
      Kuzmitchov did not seem pleased; his face expressed, as before, a
      business-like reserve and anxiety.
    

      “If I could have known that Tcherepahin would give such a price,”
      he said in a low voice, “I wouldn’t have sold Makarov those
      five tons at home. It is vexatious! But who could have told that the price
      had gone up here?”
    

      A man in a white shirt cleared away the samovar and lighted the little
      lamp before the ikon in the corner. Father Christopher whispered something
      in his ear; the man looked, made a serious face like a conspirator, as
      though to say, “I understand,” went out, and returned a little
      while afterwards and put something under the sofa. Ivan Ivanitch made
      himself a bed on the floor, yawned several times, said his prayers lazily,
      and lay down.
    

      “I think of going to the cathedral to-morrow,” said Father
      Christopher. “I know the sacristan there. I ought to go and see the
      bishop after mass, but they say he is ill.”
    

      He yawned and put out the lamp. Now there was no light in the room but the
      little lamp before the ikon.
    

      “They say he can’t receive visitors,” Father Christopher
      went on, undressing. “So I shall go away without seeing him.”
    

      He took off his full coat, and Yegorushka saw Robinson Crusoe reappear.
      Robinson stirred something in a saucer, went up to Yegorushka and
      whispered:
    

      “Lomonosov, are you asleep? Sit up; I’m going to rub you with
      oil and vinegar. It’s a good thing, only you must say a prayer.”
    

      Yegorushka roused himself quickly and sat up. Father Christopher pulled
      down the boy’s shirt, and shrinking and breathing jerkily, as though
      he were being tickled himself, began rubbing Yegorushka’s chest.
    

      “In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,” he
      whispered, “lie with your back upwards—that’s it. . . .
      You’ll be all right to-morrow, but don’t do it again. . . .
      You are as hot as fire. I suppose you were on the road in the storm.”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “You might well fall ill! In the name of the Father, the Son, and
      the Holy Ghost, . . . you might well fall ill!”
    

      After rubbing Yegorushka, Father Christopher put on his shirt again,
      covered him, made the sign of the cross over him, and walked away. Then
      Yegorushka saw him saying his prayers. Probably the old man knew a great
      many prayers by heart, for he stood a long time before the ikon murmuring.
      After saying his prayers he made the sign of the cross over the window,
      the door, Yegorushka, and Ivan Ivanitch, lay down on the little sofa
      without a pillow, and covered himself with his full coat. A clock in the
      corridor struck ten. Yegorushka thought how long a time it would be before
      morning; feeling miserable, he pressed his forehead against the back of
      the sofa and left off trying to get rid of the oppressive misty dreams.
      But morning came much sooner than he expected.
    

      It seemed to him that he had not been lying long with his head pressed to
      the back of the sofa, but when he opened his eyes slanting rays of
      sunlight were already shining on the floor through the two windows of the
      little hotel room. Father Christopher and Ivan Ivanitch were not in the
      room. The room had been tidied; it was bright, snug, and smelt of Father
      Christopher, who always smelt of cypress and dried cornflowers (at home he
      used to make the holy-water sprinklers and decorations for the ikonstands
      out of cornflowers, and so he was saturated with the smell of them).
      Yegorushka looked at the pillow, at the slanting sunbeams, at his boots,
      which had been cleaned and were standing side by side near the sofa, and
      laughed. It seemed strange to him that he was not on the bales of wool,
      that everything was dry around him, and that there was no thunder and
      lightning on the ceiling.
    

      He jumped off the sofa and began dressing. He felt splendid; nothing was
      left of his yesterday’s illness but a slight weakness in his legs
      and neck. So the vinegar and oil had done good. He remembered the steamer,
      the railway engine, and the broad river, which he had dimly seen the day
      before, and now he made haste to dress, to run to the quay and have a look
      at them. When he had washed and was putting on his red shirt, the latch of
      the door clicked, and Father Christopher appeared in the doorway, wearing
      his top-hat and a brown silk cassock over his canvas coat and carrying his
      staff in his hand. Smiling and radiant (old men are always radiant when
      they come back from church), he put a roll of holy bread and a parcel of
      some sort on the table, prayed before the ikon, and said:
    

      “God has sent us blessings—well, how are you?”
    

      “Quite well now,” answered Yegorushka, kissing his hand.
    

      “Thank God. . . . I have come from mass. I’ve been to see a
      sacristan I know. He invited me to breakfast with him, but I didn’t
      go. I don’t like visiting people too early, God bless them!”
    

      He took off his cassock, stroked himself on the chest, and without haste
      undid the parcel. Yegorushka saw a little tin of caviare, a piece of dry
      sturgeon, and a French loaf.
    

      “See; I passed a fish-shop and brought this,” said Father
      Christopher. “There is no need to indulge in luxuries on an ordinary
      weekday; but I thought, I’ve an invalid at home, so it is excusable.
      And the caviare is good, real sturgeon. . . .”
    

      The man in the white shirt brought in the samovar and a tray with
      tea-things.
    

      “Eat some,” said Father Christopher, spreading the caviare on
      a slice of bread and handing it to Yegorushka. “Eat now and enjoy
      yourself, but the time will soon come for you to be studying. Mind you
      study with attention and application, so that good may come of it. What
      you have to learn by heart, learn by heart, but when you have to tell the
      inner sense in your own words, without regard to the outer form, then say
      it in your own words. And try to master all subjects. One man knows
      mathematics excellently, but has never heard of Pyotr Mogila; another
      knows about Pyotr Mogila, but cannot explain about the moon. But you study
      so as to understand everything. Study Latin, French, German, . . .
      geography, of course, history, theology, philosophy, mathematics, . . .
      and when you have mastered everything, not with haste but with prayer and
      with zeal, then go into the service. When you know everything it will be
      easy for you in any line of life. . . . You study and strive for the
      divine blessing, and God will show you what to be. Whether a doctor, a
      judge or an engineer. . . .”
    

      Father Christopher spread a little caviare on a piece of bread, put it in
      his mouth and said:
    

      “The Apostle Paul says: ‘Do not apply yourself to strange and
      diverse studies.’ Of course, if it is black magic, unlawful arts, or
      calling up spirits from the other world, like Saul, or studying subjects
      that can be of no use to yourself or others, better not learn them. You
      must undertake only what God has blessed. Take example . . . the Holy
      Apostles spoke in all languages, so you study languages. Basil the Great
      studied mathematics and philosophy—so you study them; St. Nestor
      wrote history—so you study and write history. Take example from the
      saints.”
    

      Father Christopher sipped the tea from his saucer, wiped his moustaches,
      and shook his head.
    

      “Good!” he said. “I was educated in the old-fashioned
      way; I have forgotten a great deal by now, but still I live differently
      from other people. Indeed, there is no comparison. For instance, in
      company at a dinner, or at an assembly, one says something in Latin, or
      makes some allusion from history or philosophy, and it pleases people, and
      it pleases me myself. . . . Or when the circuit court comes and one has to
      take the oath, all the other priests are shy, but I am quite at home with
      the judges, the prosecutors, and the lawyers. I talk intellectually, drink
      a cup of tea with them, laugh, ask them what I don’t know, . . . and
      they like it. So that’s how it is, my boy. Learning is light and
      ignorance is darkness. Study! It’s hard, of course; nowadays study
      is expensive. . . . Your mother is a widow; she lives on her pension, but
      there, of course . . .”
    

      Father Christopher glanced apprehensively towards the door, and went on in
      a whisper:
    

      “Ivan Ivanitch will assist. He won’t desert you. He has no
      children of his own, and he will help you. Don’t be uneasy.”
    

      He looked grave, and whispered still more softly:
    

      “Only mind, Yegory, don’t forget your mother and Ivan
      Ivanitch, God preserve you from it. The commandment bids you honour your
      mother, and Ivan Ivanitch is your benefactor and takes the place of a
      father to you. If you become learned, God forbid you should be impatient
      and scornful with people because they are not so clever as you, then woe,
      woe to you!”
    

      Father Christopher raised his hand and repeated in a thin voice:
    

      “Woe to you! Woe to you!”
    

      Father Christopher’s tongue was loosened, and he was, as they say,
      warming to his subject; he would not have finished till dinnertime but the
      door opened and Ivan Ivanitch walked in. He said good-morning hurriedly,
      sat down to the table, and began rapidly swallowing his tea.
    

      “Well, I have settled all our business,” he said. “We
      might have gone home to-day, but we have still to think about Yegor. We
      must arrange for him. My sister told me that Nastasya Petrovna, a friend
      of hers, lives somewhere here, so perhaps she will take him in as a
      boarder.”
    

      He rummaged in his pocket-book, found a crumpled note and read:
    

      “‘Little Lower Street: Nastasya Petrovna Toskunov, living in a
      house of her own.’ We must go at once and try to find her. It’s
      a nuisance!”
    

      Soon after breakfast Ivan Ivanitch and Yegorushka left the inn.
    

      “It’s a nuisance,” muttered his uncle. “You are
      sticking to me like a burr. You and your mother want education and
      gentlemanly breeding and I have nothing but worry with you both. . . .”
    

      When they crossed the yard, the waggons and the drivers were not there.
      They had all gone off to the quay early in the morning. In a far-off dark
      corner of the yard stood the chaise.
    

      “Good-bye, chaise!” thought Yegorushka.
    

      At first they had to go a long way uphill by a broad street, then they had
      to cross a big marketplace; here Ivan Ivanitch asked a policeman for
      Little Lower Street.
    

      “I say,” said the policeman, with a grin, “it’s a
      long way off, out that way towards the town grazing ground.”
    

      They met several cabs but Ivan Ivanitch only permitted himself such a
      weakness as taking a cab in exceptional cases and on great holidays.
      Yegorushka and he walked for a long while through paved streets, then
      along streets where there were only wooden planks at the sides and no
      pavements, and in the end got to streets where there were neither planks
      nor pavements. When their legs and their tongues had brought them to
      Little Lower Street they were both red in the face, and taking off their
      hats, wiped away the perspiration.
    

      “Tell me, please,” said Ivan Ivanitch, addressing an old man
      sitting on a little bench by a gate, “where is Nastasya Petrovna
      Toskunov’s house?”
    

      “There is no one called Toskunov here,” said the old man,
      after pondering a moment. “Perhaps it’s Timoshenko you want.”
    

      “No, Toskunov. . . .”
    

      “Excuse me, there’s no one called Toskunov. . . .”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch shrugged his shoulders and trudged on farther.
    

      “You needn’t look,” the old man called after them.
      “I tell you there isn’t, and there isn’t.”
    

      “Listen, auntie,” said Ivan Ivanitch, addressing an old woman
      who was sitting at a corner with a tray of pears and sunflower seeds,
      “where is Nastasya Petrovna Toskunov’s house?”
    

      The old woman looked at him with surprise and laughed.
    

      “Why, Nastasya Petrovna live in her own house now!” she cried.
      “Lord! it is eight years since she married her daughter and gave up
      the house to her son-in-law! It’s her son-in-law lives there now.”
    

      And her eyes expressed: “How is it you didn’t know a simple
      thing like that, you fools?”
    

      “And where does she live now?” Ivan Ivanitch asked.
    

      “Oh, Lord!” cried the old woman, flinging up her hands in
      surprise. “She moved ever so long ago! It’s eight years since
      she gave up her house to her son-in-law! Upon my word!”
    

      She probably expected Ivan Ivanitch to be surprised, too, and to exclaim:
      “You don’t say so,” but Ivan Ivanitch asked very calmly:
    

      “Where does she live now?”
    

      The old woman tucked up her sleeves and, stretching out her bare arm to
      point, shouted in a shrill piercing voice:
    

      “Go straight on, straight on, straight on. You will pass a little
      red house, then you will see a little alley on your left. Turn down that
      little alley, and it will be the third gate on the right. . . .”
    

      Ivan Ivanitch and Yegorushka reached the little red house, turned to the
      left down the little alley, and made for the third gate on the right. On
      both sides of this very old grey gate there was a grey fence with big gaps
      in it. The first part of the fence was tilting forwards and threatened to
      fall, while on the left of the gate it sloped backwards towards the yard.
      The gate itself stood upright and seemed to be still undecided which would
      suit it best —to fall forwards or backwards. Ivan Ivanitch opened
      the little gate at the side, and he and Yegorushka saw a big yard
      overgrown with weeds and burdocks. A hundred paces from the gate stood a
      little house with a red roof and green shutters. A stout woman with her
      sleeves tucked up and her apron held out was standing in the middle of the
      yard, scattering something on the ground and shouting in a voice as shrill
      as that of the woman selling fruit:
    

      “Chick! . . . Chick! . . . Chick!”
    

      Behind her sat a red dog with pointed ears. Seeing the strangers, he ran
      to the little gate and broke into a tenor bark (all red dogs have a tenor
      bark).
    

      “Whom do you want?” asked the woman, putting up her hand to
      shade her eyes from the sun.
    

      “Good-morning!” Ivan Ivanitch shouted, too, waving off the red
      dog with his stick. “Tell me, please, does Nastasya Petrovna
      Toskunov live here?”
    

      “Yes! But what do you want with her?”
    

      “Perhaps you are Nastasya Petrovna?”
    

      “Well, yes, I am!”
    

      “Very pleased to see you. . . . You see, your old friend Olga
      Ivanovna Knyasev sends her love to you. This is her little son. And I,
      perhaps you remember, am her brother Ivan Ivanitch. . . . You are one of
      us from N. . . . You were born among us and married there. . . .”
    

      A silence followed. The stout woman stared blankly at Ivan Ivanitch, as
      though not believing or not understanding him, then she flushed all over,
      and flung up her hands; the oats were scattered out of her apron and tears
      spurted from her eyes.
    

      “Olga Ivanovna!” she screamed, breathless with excitement.
      “My own darling! Ah, holy saints, why am I standing here like a
      fool? My pretty little angel. . . .”
    

      She embraced Yegorushka, wetted his face with her tears, and broke down
      completely.
    

      “Heavens!” she said, wringing her hands, “Olga’s
      little boy! How delightful! He is his mother all over! The image of his
      mother! But why are you standing in the yard? Come indoors.”
    

      Crying, gasping for breath and talking as she went, she hurried towards
      the house. Her visitors trudged after her.
    

      “The room has not been done yet,” she said, ushering the
      visitors into a stuffy little drawing-room adorned with many ikons and
      pots of flowers. “Oh, Mother of God! Vassilisa, go and open the
      shutters anyway! My little angel! My little beauty! I did not know that
      Olitchka had a boy like that!”
    

      When she had calmed down and got over her first surprise Ivan Ivanitch
      asked to speak to her alone. Yegorushka went into another room; there was
      a sewing-machine; in the window was a cage with a starling in it, and
      there were as many ikons and flowers as in the drawing-room. Near the
      machine stood a little girl with a sunburnt face and chubby cheeks like
      Tit’s, and a clean cotton dress. She stared at Yegorushka without
      bElinking, and apparently felt very awkward. Yegorushka looked at her and
      after a pause asked:
    

      “What’s your name?”
    

      The little girl moved her lips, looked as if she were going to cry, and
      answered softly:
    

      “Atka. . . .”
    

      This meant Katka.
    

      “He will live with you,” Ivan Ivanitch was whispering in the
      drawing-room, “if you will be so kind, and we will pay ten roubles a
      month for his keep. He is not a spoilt boy; he is quiet. . . .”
    

      “I really don’t know what to say, Ivan Ivanitch!”
      Nastasya Petrovna sighed tearfully. “Ten roubles a month is very
      good, but it is a dreadful thing to take another person’s child! He
      may fall ill or something. . . .”
    

      When Yegorushka was summoned back to the drawing-room Ivan Ivanitch was
      standing with his hat in his hands, saying good-bye.
    

      “Well, let him stay with you now, then,” he said. “Good-bye!
      You stay, Yegor!” he said, addressing his nephew. “Don’t
      be troublesome; mind you obey Nastasya Petrovna. . . . Good-bye; I am
      coming again to-morrow.”
    

      And he went away. Nastasya once more embraced Yegorushka, called him a
      little angel, and with a tear-stained face began preparing for dinner.
      Three minutes later Yegorushka was sitting beside her, answering her
      endless questions and eating hot savoury cabbage soup.
    

      In the evening he sat again at the same table and, resting his head on his
      hand, listened to Nastasya Petrovna. Alternately laughing and crying, she
      talked of his mother’s young days, her own marriage, her children. .
      . . A cricket chirruped in the stove, and there was a faint humming from
      the burner of the lamp. Nastasya Petrovna talked in a low voice, and was
      continually dropping her thimble in her excitement; and Katka her
      granddaughter, crawled under the table after it and each time sat a long
      while under the table, probably examining Yegorushka’s feet; and
      Yegorushka listened, half dozing and looking at the old woman’s
      face, her wart with hairs on it, and the stains of tears, and he felt sad,
      very sad. He was put to sleep on a chest and told that if he were hungry
      in the night he must go out into the little passage and take some chicken,
      put there under a plate in the window.
    

      Next morning Ivan Ivanitch and Father Christopher came to say good-bye.
      Nastasya Petrovna was delighted to see them, and was about to set the
      samovar; but Ivan Ivanitch, who was in a great hurry, waved his hands and
      said:
    

      “We have no time for tea! We are just setting off.”
    

      Before parting they all sat down and were silent for a minute. Nastasya
      Petrovna heaved a deep sigh and looked towards the ikon with tear-stained
      eyes.
    

      “Well,” began Ivan Ivanitch, getting up, “so you will
      stay. . . .”
    

      All at once the look of business-like reserve vanished from his face; he
      flushed a little and said with a mournful smile:
    

      “Mind you work hard. . . . Don’t forget your mother, and obey
      Nastasya Petrovna. . . . If you are diligent at school, Yegor, I’ll
      stand by you.”
    

      He took his purse out of his pocket, turned his back to Yegorushka,
      fumbled for a long time among the smaller coins, and, finding a ten-kopeck
      piece, gave it to Yegorushka.
    

      Father Christopher, without haste, blessed Yegorushka.
    

      “In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. . . .
      Study,” he said. “Work hard, my lad. If I die, remember me in
      your prayers. Here is a ten-kopeck piece from me, too. . . .”
    

      Yegorushka kissed his hand, and shed tears; something whispered in his
      heart that he would never see the old man again.
    

      “I have applied at the high school already,” said Ivan
      Ivanitch in a voice as though there were a corpse in the room. “You
      will take him for the entrance examination on the seventh of August. . . .
      Well, good-bye; God bless you, good-bye, Yegor!”
    

      “You might at least have had a cup of tea,” wailed Nastasya
      Petrovna.
    

      Through the tears that filled his eyes Yegorushka could not see his uncle
      and Father Christopher go out. He rushed to the window, but they were not
      in the yard, and the red dog, who had just been barking, was running back
      from the gate with the air of having done his duty. When Yegorushka ran
      out of the gate Ivan Ivanitch and Father Christopher, the former waving
      his stick with the crook, the latter his staff, were just turning the
      corner. Yegorushka felt that with these people all that he had known till
      then had vanished from him for ever. He sank helplessly on to the little
      bench, and with bitter tears greeted the new unknown life that was
      beginning for him now. . . .
    

      What would that life be like?
    





      Best Russian Short Stories
    











      INTRODUCTION
    

Conceive the joy of
      a lover of nature who, leaving the art galleries, wanders out among the
      trees and wild flowers and birds that the pictures of the galleries have
      sentimentalised. It is some such joy that the man who truly loves the
      noblest in letters feels when tasting for the first time the simple
      delights of Russian literature. French and English and German authors,
      too, occasionally, offer works of lofty, simple naturalness; but the very
      keynote to the whole of Russian literature is simplicity, naturalness,
      veraciousness.
    

      Another essentially Russian trait is the quite unaffected conception that
      the lowly are on a plane of equality with the so-called upper classes.
      When the Englishman Dickens wrote with his profound pity and understanding
      of the poor, there was yet a bit; of remoteness, perhaps, even, a bit of
      caricature, in his treatment of them. He showed their sufferings to the
      rest of the world with a “Behold how the other half lives!”
      The Russian writes of the poor, as it were, from within, as one of them,
      with no eye to theatrical effect upon the well-to-do. There is no
      insistence upon peculiar virtues or vices. The poor are portrayed just as
      they are, as human beings like the rest of us. A democratic spirit is
      reflected, breathing a broad humanity, a true universality, an unstudied
      generosity that proceed not from the intellectual conviction that to
      understand all is to forgive all, but from an instinctive feeling that no
      man has the right to set himself up as a judge over another, that one can
      only observe and record.
    

      In 1834 two short stories appeared, The Queen of Spades, by
      Pushkin, and The Cloak, by Gogol. The first was a finishing-off of
      the old, outgoing style of romanticism, the other was the beginning of the
      new, the characteristically Russian style. We read Pushkin’s Queen
      of Spades, the first story in the volume, and the likelihood is we
      shall enjoy it greatly. “But why is it Russian?” we ask. The
      answer is, “It is not Russian.” It might have been printed in
      an American magazine over the name of John Brown. But, now, take the very
      next story in the volume, The Cloak. “Ah,” you exclaim,
      “a genuine Russian story, Surely. You cannot palm it off on me over
      the name of Jones or Smith.” Why? Because The Cloak for the
      first time strikes that truly Russian note of deep sympathy with the
      disinherited. It is not yet wholly free from artificiality, and so is not
      yet typical of the purely realistic fiction that reached its perfected
      development in Turgenev and Tolstoy.
    

      Though Pushkin heads the list of those writers who made the literature of
      their country world-famous, he was still a romanticist, in the universal
      literary fashion of his day. However, he already gave strong indication of
      the peculiarly Russian genius for naturalness or realism, and was a true
      Russian in his simplicity of style. In no sense an innovator, but taking
      the cue for his poetry from Byron and for his prose from the romanticism
      current at that period, he was not in advance of his age. He had a
      revolutionary streak in his nature, as his Ode to Liberty and other
      bits of verse and his intimacy with the Decembrist rebels show. But his
      youthful fire soon died down, and he found it possible to accommodate
      himself to the life of a Russian high functionary and courtier under the
      severe despot Nicholas I, though, to be sure, he always hated that life.
      For all his flirting with revolutionarism, he never displayed great
      originality or depth of thought. He was simply an extraordinarily gifted
      author, a perfect versifier, a wondrous lyrist, and a delicious raconteur,
      endowed with a grace, ease and power of expression that delighted even the
      exacting artistic sense of Turgenev. To him aptly applies the dictum of
      Socrates: “Not by wisdom do the poets write poetry, but by a sort of
      genius and inspiration.” I do not mean to convey that as a thinker
      Pushkin is to be despised. Nevertheless, it is true that he would occupy a
      lower position in literature did his reputation depend upon his
      contributions to thought and not upon his value as an artist.
    

      “We are all descended from Gogol’s Cloak,” said a
      Russian writer. And Dostoyevsky’s novel, Poor People, which
      appeared ten years later, is, in a way, merely an extension of Gogol’s
      shorter tale. In Dostoyevsky, indeed, the passion for the common people
      and the all-embracing, all-penetrating pity for suffering humanity reach
      their climax. He was a profound psychologist and delved deeply into the
      human soul, especially in its abnormal and diseased aspects. Between
      scenes of heart-rending, abject poverty, injustice, and wrong, and the
      torments of mental pathology, he managed almost to exhaust the whole range
      of human woe. And he analysed this misery with an intensity of feeling and
      a painstaking regard for the most harrowing details that are quite
      upsetting to normally constituted nerves. Yet all the horrors must be
      forgiven him because of the motive inspiring them—an overpowering
      love and the desire to induce an equal love in others. It is not horror
      for horror’s sake, not a literary tour de force, as in Poe,
      but horror for a high purpose, for purification through suffering, which
      was one of the articles of Dostoyevsky’s faith.
    

      Following as a corollary from the love and pity for mankind that make a
      leading element in Russian literature, is a passionate search for the
      means of improving the lot of humanity, a fervent attachment to social
      ideas and ideals. A Russian author is more ardently devoted to a cause
      than an American short-story writer to a plot. This, in turn, is but a
      reflection of the spirit of the Russian people, especially of the
      intellectuals. The Russians take literature perhaps more seriously than
      any other nation. To them books are not a mere diversion. They demand that
      fiction and poetry be a true mirror of life and be of service to life. A
      Russian author, to achieve the highest recognition, must be a thinker
      also. He need not necessarily be a finished artist. Everything is
      subordinated to two main requirements—humanitarian ideals and
      fidelity to life. This is the secret of the marvellous simplicity of
      Russian-literary art. Before the supreme function of literature, the
      Russian writer stands awed and humbled. He knows he cannot cover up
      poverty of thought, poverty of spirit and lack of sincerity by rhetorical
      tricks or verbal cleverness. And if he possesses the two essential
      requirements, the simplest language will suffice.
    

      These qualities are exemplified at their best by Turgenev and Tolstoy.
      They both had a strong social consciousness; they both grappled with the
      problems of human welfare; they were both artists in the larger sense,
      that is, in their truthful representation of life, Turgenev was an artist
      also in the narrower sense—in a keen appreciation Of form.
      Thoroughly Occidental in his tastes, he sought the regeneration of Russia
      in radical progress along the lines of European democracy. Tolstoy, on the
      other hand, sought the salvation of mankind in a return to the primitive
      life and primitive Christian religion.
    

      The very first work of importance by Turgenev, A Sportsman’s
      Sketches, dealt with the question of serfdom, and it wielded
      tremendous influence in bringing about its abolition. Almost every
      succeeding book of his, from Rudin through Fathers and Sons
      to Virgin Soil, presented vivid pictures of contemporary Russian
      society, with its problems, the clash of ideas between the old and the new
      generations, and the struggles, the aspirations and the thoughts that
      engrossed the advanced youth of Russia; so that his collected works form a
      remarkable literary record of the successive movements of Russian society
      in a period of preparation, fraught with epochal significance, which
      culminated in the overthrow of Czarism and the inauguration of a new and
      true democracy, marking the beginning, perhaps, of a radical
      transformation the world over.
    

      “The greatest writer of Russia.” That is Turgenev’s
      estimate of Tolstoy. “A second Shakespeare!” was Flaubert’s
      enthusiastic outburst. The Frenchman’s comparison is not wholly
      illuminating. The one point of resemblance between the two authors is
      simply in the tremendous magnitude of their genius. Each is a Colossus.
      Each creates a whole world of characters, from kings and princes and
      ladies to servants and maids and peasants. But how vastly divergent the
      angle of approach! Anna Karenina may have all the subtle womanly charm of
      an Olivia or a Portia, but how different her trials. Shakespeare could not
      have treated Anna’s problems at all. Anna could not have appeared in
      his pages except as a sinning Gertrude, the mother of Hamlet. Shakespeare
      had all the prejudices of his age. He accepted the world as it is with its
      absurd moralities, its conventions and institutions and social classes. A
      gravedigger is naturally inferior to a lord, and if he is to be presented
      at all, he must come on as a clown. The people are always a mob, the
      rabble. Tolstoy, is the revolutionist, the iconoclast. He has the
      completest independence of mind. He utterly refuses to accept established
      opinions just because they are established. He probes into the right and
      wrong of things. His is a broad, generous universal democracy, his is a
      comprehensive sympathy, his an absolute incapacity to evaluate human
      beings according to station, rank or profession, or any standard but that
      of spiritual worth. In all this he was a complete contrast to Shakespeare.
      Each of the two men was like a creature of a higher world, possessed of
      supernatural endowments. Their omniscience of all things human, their
      insight into the hiddenmost springs of men’s actions appear
      miraculous. But Shakespeare makes the impression of detachment from his
      works. The works do not reveal the man; while in Tolstoy the greatness of
      the man blends with the greatness of the genius. Tolstoy was no mere
      oracle uttering profundities he wot not of. As the social, religious and
      moral tracts that he wrote in the latter period of his life are instinct
      with a literary beauty of which he never could divest himself, and which
      gave an artistic value even to his sermons, so his earlier novels show a
      profound concern for the welfare of society, a broad, humanitarian spirit,
      a bigness of soul that included prince and pauper alike.
    

      Is this extravagant praise? Then let me echo William Dean Howells: “I
      know very well that I do not speak of Tolstoy’s books in measured
      terms; I cannot.”
    

      The Russian writers so far considered have made valuable contributions to
      the short story; but, with the exception of Pushkin, whose reputation
      rests chiefly upon his poetry, their best work, generally, was in the
      field of the long novel. It was the novel that gave Russian literature its
      pre-eminence. It could not have been otherwise, since Russia is young as a
      literary nation, and did not come of age until the period at which the
      novel was almost the only form of literature that counted. If, therefore,
      Russia was to gain distinction in the world of letters, it could be only
      through the novel. Of the measure of her success there is perhaps no
      better testimony than the words of Matthew Arnold, a critic certainly not
      given to overstatement. “The Russian novel,” he wrote in 1887,
      “has now the vogue, and deserves to have it... The Russian novelist
      is master of a spell to which the secret of human nature—both what
      is external and internal, gesture and manner no less than thought and
      feeling—willingly make themselves known... In that form of
      imaginative literature, which in our day is the most popular and the most
      possible, the Russians at the present moment seem to me to hold the field.”
    

      With the strict censorship imposed on Russian writers, many of them who
      might perhaps have contented themselves with expressing their opinions in
      essays, were driven to conceal their meaning under the guise of satire or
      allegory; which gave rise to a peculiar genre of literature, a sort of
      editorial or essay done into fiction, in which the satirist Saltykov, a
      contemporary of Turgenev and Dostoyevsky, who wrote under the pseudonym of
      Shchedrin, achieved the greatest success and popularity.
    

      It was not however, until the concluding quarter of the last century that
      writers like Korolenko and Garshin arose, who devoted themselves chiefly
      to the cultivation of the short story. With Anton Chekhov the short story
      assumed a position of importance alongside the larger works of the great
      Russian masters. Gorky and Andreyev made the short story do the same
      service for the active revolutionary period in the last decade of the
      nineteenth century down to its temporary defeat in 1906 that Turgenev
      rendered in his series of larger novels for the period of preparation. But
      very different was the voice of Gorky, the man sprung from the people, the
      embodiment of all the accumulated wrath and indignation of centuries of
      social wrong and oppression, from the gentlemanly tones of the cultured
      artist Turgenev. Like a mighty hammer his blows fell upon the decaying
      fabric of the old society. His was no longer a feeble, despairing protest.
      With the strength and confidence of victory he made onslaught upon
      onslaught on the old institutions until they shook and almost tumbled. And
      when reaction celebrated its short-lived triumph and gloom settled again
      upon his country and most of his co-fighters withdrew from the battle in
      despair, some returning to the old-time Russian mood of hopelessness,
      passivity and apathy, and some even backsliding into wild orgies of
      literary debauchery, Gorky never wavered, never lost his faith and hope,
      never for a moment was untrue to his principles. Now, with the revolution
      victorious, he has come into his right, one of the most respected, beloved
      and picturesque figures in the Russian democracy.
    

      Kuprin, the most facile and talented short-story writer next to Chekhov,
      has, on the whole, kept well to the best literary traditions of Russia,
      though he has frequently wandered off to extravagant sex themes, for which
      he seems to display as great a fondness as Artzybashev. Semyonov is a
      unique character in Russian literature, a peasant who had scarcely
      mastered the most elementary mechanics of writing when he penned his first
      story. But that story pleased Tolstoy, who befriended and encouraged him.
      His tales deal altogether with peasant life in country and city, and have
      a lifelikeness, an artlessness, a simplicity striking even in a Russian
      author.
    

      There is a small group of writers detached from the main current of
      Russian literature who worship at the shrine of beauty and mysticism. Of
      these Sologub has attained the highest reputation.
    

      Rich as Russia has become in the short story, Anton Chekhov still stands
      out as the supreme master, one of the greatest short-story writers of the
      world. He was born in Taganarok, in the Ukraine, in 1860, the son of a
      peasant serf who succeeded in buying his freedom. Anton Chekhov studied
      medicine, but devoted himself largely to writing, in which, he
      acknowledged, his scientific training was of great service. Though he
      lived only forty-four years, dying of tuberculosis in 1904, his collected
      works consist of sixteen fair-sized volumes of short stories, and several
      dramas besides. A few volumes of his works have already appeared in
      English translation.
    

      Critics, among them Tolstoy, have often compared Chekhov to Maupassant. I
      find it hard to discover the resemblance. Maupassant holds a supreme
      position as a short-story writer; so does Chekhov. But there, it seems to
      me, the likeness ends.
    

      The chill wind that blows from the atmosphere created by the Frenchman’s
      objective artistry is by the Russian commingled with the warm breath of a
      great human sympathy. Maupassant never tells where his sympathies lie, and
      you don’t know; you only guess. Chekhov does not tell you where his
      sympathies lie, either, but you know all the same; you don’t have to
      guess. And yet Chekhov is as objective as Maupassant. In the chronicling
      of facts, conditions, and situations, in the reproduction of characters,
      he is scrupulously true, hard, and inexorable. But without obtruding his
      personality, he somehow manages to let you know that he is always present,
      always at hand. If you laugh, he is there to laugh with you; if you cry,
      he is there to shed a tear with you; if you are horrified, he is
      horrified, too. It is a subtle art by which he contrives to make one feel
      the nearness of himself for all his objectiveness, so subtle that it
      defies analysis. And yet it constitutes one of the great charms of his
      tales.
    

      Chekhov’s works show an astounding resourcefulness and versatility.
      There is no monotony, no repetition. Neither in incident nor in character
      are any two stories alike. The range of Chekhov’s knowledge of men
      and things seems to be unlimited, and he is extravagant in the use of it.
      Some great idea which many a writer would consider sufficient to expand
      into a whole novel he disposes of in a story of a few pages. Take, for
      example, Vanka, apparently but a mere episode in the childhood of a
      nine-year-old boy; while it is really the tragedy of a whole life in its
      tempting glimpses into a past environment and ominous forebodings of the
      future—all contracted into the space of four or five pages. Chekhov
      is lavish with his inventiveness. Apparently, it cost him no effort to
      invent.
    

      I have used the word inventiveness for lack of a better name. It expresses
      but lamely the peculiar faculty that distinguishes Chekhov. Chekhov does
      not really invent. He reveals. He reveals things that no author before him
      has revealed. It is as though he possessed a special organ which enabled
      him to see, hear and feel things of which we other mortals did not even
      dream the existence. Yet when he lays them bare we know that they are not
      fictitious, not invented, but as real as the ordinary familiar facts of
      life. This faculty of his playing on all conceivable objects, all
      conceivable emotions, no matter how microscopic, endows them with life and
      a soul. By virtue of this power The Steppe, an uneventful record of
      peasants travelling day after day through flat, monotonous fields, becomes
      instinct with dramatic interest, and its 125 pages seem all too short. And
      by virtue of the same attribute we follow with breathless suspense the
      minute description of the declining days of a great scientist, who feels
      his physical and mental faculties gradually ebbing away. A Tiresome
      Story, Chekhov calls it; and so it would be without the vitality
      conjured into it by the magic touch of this strange genius.
    

      Divination is perhaps a better term than invention. Chekhov divines the
      most secret impulses of the soul, scents out what is buried in the
      subconscious, and brings it up to the surface. Most writers are
      specialists. They know certain strata of society, and when they venture
      beyond, their step becomes uncertain. Chekhov’s material is only
      delimited by humanity. He is equally at home everywhere. The peasant, the
      labourer, the merchant, the priest, the professional man, the scholar, the
      military officer, and the government functionary, Gentile or Jew, man,
      woman, or child—Chekhov is intimate with all of them. His characters
      are sharply defined individuals, not types. In almost all his stories,
      however short, the men and women and children who play a part in them come
      out as clear, distinct personalities. Ariadne is as vivid a character as
      Lilly, the heroine of Sudermann’s Song of Songs; yet Ariadne
      is but a single story in a volume of stories. Who that has read The
      Darling can ever forget her—the woman who had no separate
      existence of her own, but thought the thoughts, felt the feelings, and
      spoke the words of the men she loved? And when there was no man to love
      any more, she was utterly crushed until she found a child to take care of
      and to love; and then she sank her personality in the boy as she had sunk
      it before in her husbands and lover, became a mere reflection of him, and
      was happy again.
    

      In the compilation of this volume I have been guided by the desire to give
      the largest possible representation to the prominent authors of the
      Russian short story, and to present specimens characteristic of each. At
      the same time the element of interest has been kept in mind; and in a few
      instances, as in the case of Korolenko, the selection of the story was
      made with a view to its intrinsic merit and striking qualities rather than
      as typifying the writer’s art. It was, of course, impossible in the
      space of one book to exhaust all that is best. But to my knowledge, the
      present volume is the most comprehensive anthology of the Russian short
      story in the English language, and gives a fair notion of the achievement
      in that field. All who enjoy good reading, I have no reason to doubt, will
      get pleasure from it, and if, in addition, it will prove of assistance to
      American students of Russian literature, I shall feel that the task has
      been doubly worth the while.
    

      Korolenko’s Shades and Andreyev’s Lazarus first
      appeared in Current Opinion, and Artzybashev’s The
      Revolutionist in the Metropolitan Magazine. I take pleasure in
      thanking Mr. Edward J. Wheeler, editor of Current Opinion, and Mr.
      Carl Hovey, editor of the Metropolitan Magazine, for permission to
      reprint them.
    

      [Signature: Thomas Seltzer]
    

      “Everything is subordinated to two main requirements—humanitarian
      ideals and fidelity to life. This is the secret of the marvellous
      simplicity of Russian literary art.”—THOMAS SELTZER.
    











      BEST RUSSIAN SHORT STORIES
    











      THE QUEEN OF SPADES
    

      BY ALEXSANDR S. PUSHKIN
    

      I
    

There was a card
      party at the rooms of Narumov of the Horse Guards. The long winter night
      passed away imperceptibly, and it was five o’clock in the morning
      before the company sat down to supper. Those who had won, ate with a good
      appetite; the others sat staring absently at their empty plates. When the
      champagne appeared, however, the conversation became more animated, and
      all took a part in it.
    

      “And how did you fare, Surin?” asked the host.
    

      “Oh, I lost, as usual. I must confess that I am unlucky: I play
      mirandole, I always keep cool, I never allow anything to put me out, and
      yet I always lose!”
    

      “And you did not once allow yourself to be tempted to back the
      red?... Your firmness astonishes me.”
    

      “But what do you think of Hermann?” said one of the guests,
      pointing to a young Engineer: “he has never had a card in his hand
      in his life, he has never in his life laid a wager, and yet he sits here
      till five o’clock in the morning watching our play.”
    

      “Play interests me very much,” said Hermann: “but I am
      not in the position to sacrifice the necessary in the hope of winning the
      superfluous.”
    

      “Hermann is a German: he is economical—that is all!”
      observed Tomsky. “But if there is one person that I cannot
      understand, it is my grandmother, the Countess Anna Fedotovna.”
    

      “How so?” inquired the guests.
    

      “I cannot understand,” continued Tomsky, “how it is that
      my grandmother does not punt.”
    

      “What is there remarkable about an old lady of eighty not punting?”
      said Narumov.
    

      “Then you do not know the reason why?”
    

      “No, really; haven’t the faintest idea.”
    

      “Oh! then listen. About sixty years ago, my grandmother went to
      Paris, where she created quite a sensation. People used to run after her
      to catch a glimpse of the ‘Muscovite Venus.’ Richelieu made
      love to her, and my grandmother maintains that he almost blew out his
      brains in consequence of her cruelty. At that time ladies used to play at
      faro. On one occasion at the Court, she lost a very considerable sum to
      the Duke of Orleans. On returning home, my grandmother removed the patches
      from her face, took off her hoops, informed my grandfather of her loss at
      the gaming-table, and ordered him to pay the money. My deceased
      grandfather, as far as I remember, was a sort of house-steward to my
      grandmother. He dreaded her like fire; but, on hearing of such a heavy
      loss, he almost went out of his mind; he calculated the various sums she
      had lost, and pointed out to her that in six months she had spent half a
      million francs, that neither their Moscow nor Saratov estates were in
      Paris, and finally refused point blank to pay the debt. My grandmother
      gave him a box on the ear and slept by herself as a sign of her
      displeasure. The next day she sent for her husband, hoping that this
      domestic punishment had produced an effect upon him, but she found him
      inflexible. For the first time in her life, she entered into reasonings
      and explanations with him, thinking to be able to convince him by pointing
      out to him that there are debts and debts, and that there is a great
      difference between a Prince and a coachmaker. But it was all in vain, my
      grandfather still remained obdurate. But the matter did not rest there. My
      grandmother did not know what to do. She had shortly before become
      acquainted with a very remarkable man. You have heard of Count St.
      Germain, about whom so many marvellous stories are told. You know that he
      represented himself as the Wandering Jew, as the discoverer of the elixir
      of life, of the philosopher’s stone, and so forth. Some laughed at
      him as a charlatan; but Casanova, in his memoirs, says that he was a spy.
      But be that as it may, St. Germain, in spite of the mystery surrounding
      him, was a very fascinating person, and was much sought after in the best
      circles of society. Even to this day my grandmother retains an
      affectionate recollection of him, and becomes quite angry if any one
      speaks disrespectfully of him. My grandmother knew that St. Germain had
      large sums of money at his disposal. She resolved to have recourse to him,
      and she wrote a letter to him asking him to come to her without delay. The
      queer old man immediately waited upon her and found her overwhelmed with
      grief. She described to him in the blackest colours the barbarity of her
      husband, and ended by declaring that her whole hope depended upon his
      friendship and amiability.
    

      “St. Germain reflected.
    

      “‘I could advance you the sum you want,’ said he;
      ‘but I know that you would not rest easy until you had paid me back,
      and I should not like to bring fresh troubles upon you. But there is
      another way of getting out of your difficulty: you can win back your
      money.’
    

      “‘But, my dear Count,’ replied my grandmother, ‘I
      tell you that I haven’t any money left.’
    

      “‘Money is not necessary,’ replied St. Germain: ‘be
      pleased to listen to me.’
    

      “Then he revealed to her a secret, for which each of us would give a
      good deal...”
    

      The young officers listened with increased attention. Tomsky lit his pipe,
      puffed away for a moment and then continued:
    

      “That same evening my grandmother went to Versailles to the jeu
      de la reine. The Duke of Orleans kept the bank; my grandmother excused
      herself in an off-hand manner for not having yet paid her debt, by
      inventing some little story, and then began to play against him. She chose
      three cards and played them one after the other: all three won sonika,
      [Said of a card when it wins or loses in the quickest possible time.] and
      my grandmother recovered every farthing that she had lost.”
    

      “Mere chance!” said one of the guests.
    

      “A tale!” observed Hermann.
    

      “Perhaps they were marked cards!” said a third.
    

      “I do not think so,” replied Tomsky gravely.
    

      “What!” said Narumov, “you have a grandmother who knows
      how to hit upon three lucky cards in succession, and you have never yet
      succeeded in getting the secret of it out of her?”
    

      “That’s the deuce of it!” replied Tomsky: “she had
      four sons, one of whom was my father; all four were determined gamblers,
      and yet not to one of them did she ever reveal her secret, although it
      would not have been a bad thing either for them or for me. But this is
      what I heard from my uncle, Count Ivan Ilyich, and he assured me, on his
      honour, that it was true. The late Chaplitzky—the same who died in
      poverty after having squandered millions—once lost, in his youth,
      about three hundred thousand roubles—to Zorich, if I remember
      rightly. He was in despair. My grandmother, who was always very severe
      upon the extravagance of young men, took pity, however, upon Chaplitzky.
      She gave him three cards, telling him to play them one after the other, at
      the same time exacting from him a solemn promise that he would never play
      at cards again as long as he lived. Chaplitzky then went to his victorious
      opponent, and they began a fresh game. On the first card he staked fifty
      thousand rubles and won sonika; he doubled the stake and won again,
      till at last, by pursuing the same tactics, he won back more than he had
      lost ...
    

      “But it is time to go to bed: it is a quarter to six already.”
    

      And indeed it was already beginning to dawn: the young men emptied their
      glasses and then took leave of each other.
    

      II
    

The old Countess A——
      was seated in her dressing-room in front of her looking—glass. Three
      waiting maids stood around her. One held a small pot of rouge, another a
      box of hair-pins, and the third a tall can with bright red ribbons. The
      Countess had no longer the slightest pretensions to beauty, but she still
      preserved the habits of her youth, dressed in strict accordance with the
      fashion of seventy years before, and made as long and as careful a
      toilette as she would have done sixty years previously. Near the window,
      at an embroidery frame, sat a young lady, her ward.
    

      “Good morning, grandmamma,” said a young officer, entering the
      room. “Bonjour, Mademoiselle Lise. Grandmamma, I want to ask
      you something.”
    

      “What is it, Paul?”
    

      “I want you to let me introduce one of my friends to you, and to
      allow me to bring him to the ball on Friday.”
    

      “Bring him direct to the ball and introduce him to me there. Were
      you at B——‘s yesterday?”
    

      “Yes; everything went off very pleasantly, and dancing was kept up
      until five o’clock. How charming Yeletzkaya was!”
    

      “But, my dear, what is there charming about her? Isn’t she
      like her grandmother, the Princess Daria Petrovna? By the way, she must be
      very old, the Princess Daria Petrovna.”
    

      “How do you mean, old?” cried Tomsky thoughtlessly; “she
      died seven years ago.”
    

      The young lady raised her head and made a sign to the young officer. He
      then remembered that the old Countess was never to be informed of the
      death of any of her contemporaries, and he bit his lips. But the old
      Countess heard the news with the greatest indifference.
    

      “Dead!” said she; “and I did not know it. We were
      appointed maids of honour at the same time, and when we were presented to
      the Empress...”
    

      And the Countess for the hundredth time related to her grandson one of her
      anecdotes.
    

      “Come, Paul,” said she, when she had finished her story,
      “help me to get up. Lizanka, where is my snuff-box?”
    

      And the Countess with her three maids went behind a screen to finish her
      toilette. Tomsky was left alone with the young lady.
    

      “Who is the gentleman you wish to introduce to the Countess?”
      asked Lizaveta Ivanovna in a whisper.
    

      “Narumov. Do you know him?”
    

      “No. Is he a soldier or a civilian?”
    

      “A soldier.”
    

      “Is he in the Engineers?”
    

      “No, in the Cavalry. What made you think that he was in the
      Engineers?”
    

      The young lady smiled, but made no reply.
    

      “Paul,” cried the Countess from behind the screen, “send
      me some new novel, only pray don’t let it be one of the present day
      style.”
    

      “What do you mean, grandmother?”
    

      “That is, a novel, in which the hero strangles neither his father
      nor his mother, and in which there are no drowned bodies. I have a great
      horror of drowned persons.”
    

      “There are no such novels nowadays. Would you like a Russian one?”
    

      “Are there any Russian novels? Send me one, my dear, pray send me
      one!”
    

      “Good-bye, grandmother: I am in a hurry... Good-bye, Lizaveta
      Ivanovna. What made you think that Narumov was in the Engineers?”
    

      And Tomsky left the boudoir.
    

      Lizaveta Ivanovna was left alone: she laid aside her work and began to
      look out of the window. A few moments afterwards, at a corner house on the
      other side of the street, a young officer appeared. A deep blush covered
      her cheeks; she took up her work again and bent her head down over the
      frame. At the same moment the Countess returned completely dressed.
    

      “Order the carriage, Lizaveta,” said she; “we will go
      out for a drive.”
    

      Lizaveta arose from the frame and began to arrange her work.
    

      “What is the matter with you, my child, are you deaf?” cried
      the Countess. “Order the carriage to be got ready at once.”
    

      “I will do so this moment,” replied the young lady, hastening
      into the ante-room.
    

      A servant entered and gave the Countess some books from Prince Paul
      Aleksandrovich.
    

      “Tell him that I am much obliged to him,” said the Countess.
      “Lizaveta! Lizaveta! Where are you running to?”
    

      “I am going to dress.”
    

      “There is plenty of time, my dear. Sit down here. Open the first
      volume and read to me aloud.”
    

      Her companion took the book and read a few lines.
    

      “Louder,” said the Countess. “What is the matter with
      you, my child? Have you lost your voice? Wait—give me that footstool—a
      little nearer—that will do.”
    

      Lizaveta read two more pages. The Countess yawned.
    

      “Put the book down,” said she: “what a lot of nonsense!
      Send it back to Prince Paul with my thanks... But where is the carriage?”
    

      “The carriage is ready,” said Lizaveta, looking out into the
      street.
    

      “How is it that you are not dressed?” said the Countess:
      “I must always wait for you. It is intolerable, my dear!”
    

      Liza hastened to her room. She had not been there two minutes, before the
      Countess began to ring with all her might. The three waiting-maids came
      running in at one door and the valet at another.
    

      “How is it that you cannot hear me when I ring for you?” said
      the Countess. “Tell Lizaveta Ivanovna that I am waiting for her.”
    

      Lizaveta returned with her hat and cloak on.
    

      “At last you are here!” said the Countess. “But why such
      an elaborate toilette? Whom do you intend to captivate? What sort of
      weather is it? It seems rather windy.”
    

      “No, your Ladyship, it is very calm,” replied the valet.
    

      “You never think of what you are talking about. Open the window. So
      it is: windy and bitterly cold. Unharness the horses. Lizaveta, we won’t
      go out—there was no need for you to deck yourself like that.”
    

      “What a life is mine!” thought Lizaveta Ivanovna.
    

      And, in truth, Lizaveta Ivanovna was a very unfortunate creature. “The
      bread of the stranger is bitter,” says Dante, “and his
      staircase hard to climb.” But who can know what the bitterness of
      dependence is so well as the poor companion of an old lady of quality? The
      Countess A—— had by no means a bad heart, but she was
      capricious, like a woman who had been spoilt by the world, as well as
      being avaricious and egotistical, like all old people who have seen their
      best days, and whose thoughts are with the past and not the present. She
      participated in all the vanities of the great world, went to balls, where
      she sat in a corner, painted and dressed in old-fashioned style, like a
      deformed but indispensable ornament of the ball-room; all the guests on
      entering approached her and made a profound bow, as if in accordance with
      a set ceremony, but after that nobody took any further notice of her. She
      received the whole town at her house, and observed the strictest
      etiquette, although she could no longer recognise the faces of people. Her
      numerous domestics, growing fat and old in her ante-chamber and servants’
      hall, did just as they liked, and vied with each other in robbing the aged
      Countess in the most bare-faced manner. Lizaveta Ivanovna was the martyr
      of the household. She made tea, and was reproached with using too much
      sugar; she read novels aloud to the Countess, and the faults of the author
      were visited upon her head; she accompanied the Countess in her walks, and
      was held answerable for the weather or the state of the pavement. A salary
      was attached to the post, but she very rarely received it, although she
      was expected to dress like everybody else, that is to say, like very few
      indeed. In society she played the most pitiable role. Everybody knew her,
      and nobody paid her any attention. At balls she danced only when a partner
      was wanted, and ladies would only take hold of her arm when it was
      necessary to lead her out of the room to attend to their dresses. She was
      very self-conscious, and felt her position keenly, and she looked about
      her with impatience for a deliverer to come to her rescue; but the young
      men, calculating in their giddiness, honoured her with but very little
      attention, although Lizaveta Ivanovna was a hundred times prettier than
      the bare-faced and cold-hearted marriageable girls around whom they
      hovered. Many a time did she quietly sFlink away from the glittering but
      wearisome drawing-room, to go and cry in her own poor little room, in
      which stood a screen, a chest of drawers, a looking-glass and a painted
      bedstead, and where a tallow candle burnt feebly in a copper candle-stick.
    

      One morning—this was about two days after the evening party
      described at the beginning of this story, and a week previous to the scene
      at which we have just assisted—Lizaveta Ivanovna was seated near the
      window at her embroidery frame, when, happening to look out into the
      street, she caught sight of a young Engineer officer, standing motionless
      with his eyes fixed upon her window. She lowered her head and went on
      again with her work. About five minutes afterwards she looked out again—the
      young officer was still standing in the same place. Not being in the habit
      of coquetting with passing officers, she did not continue to gaze out into
      the street, but went on sewing for a couple of hours, without raising her
      head. Dinner was announced. She rose up and began to put her embroidery
      away, but glancing casually out of the window, she perceived the officer
      again. This seemed to her very strange. After dinner she went to the
      window with a certain feeling of uneasiness, but the officer was no longer
      there—and she thought no more about him.
    

      A couple of days afterwards, just as she was stepping into the carriage
      with the Countess, she saw him again. He was standing close behind the
      door, with his face half-concealed by his fur collar, but his dark eyes
      sparkled beneath his cap. Lizaveta felt alarmed, though she knew not why,
      and she trembled as she seated herself in the carriage.
    

      On returning home, she hastened to the window—the officer was
      standing in his accustomed place, with his eyes fixed upon her. She drew
      back, a prey to curiosity and agitated by a feeling which was quite new to
      her.
    

      From that time forward not a day passed without the young officer making
      his appearance under the window at the customary hour, and between him and
      her there was established a sort of mute acquaintance. Sitting in her
      place at work, she used to feel his approach; and raising her head, she
      would look at him longer and longer each day. The young man seemed to be
      very grateful to her: she saw with the sharp eye of youth, how a sudden
      flush covered his pale cheeks each time that their glances met. After
      about a week she commenced to smile at him...
    

      When Tomsky asked permission of his grandmother the Countess to present
      one of his friends to her, the young girl’s heart beat violently.
      But hearing that Narumov was not an Engineer, she regretted that by her
      thoughtless question, she had betrayed her secret to the volatile Tomsky.
    

      Hermann was the son of a German who had become a naturalised Russian, and
      from whom he had inherited a small capital. Being firmly convinced of the
      necessity of preserving his independence, Hermann did not touch his
      private income, but lived on his pay, without allowing himself the
      slightest luxury. Moreover, he was reserved and ambitious, and his
      companions rarely had an opportunity of making merry at the expense of his
      extreme parsimony. He had strong passions and an ardent imagination, but
      his firmness of disposition preserved him from the ordinary errors of
      young men. Thus, though a gamester at heart, he never touched a card, for
      he considered his position did not allow him—as he said—“to
      risk the necessary in the hope of winning the superfluous,” yet he
      would sit for nights together at the card table and follow with feverish
      anxiety the different turns of the game.
    

      The story of the three cards had produced a powerful impression upon his
      imagination, and all night long he could think of nothing else. “If,”
      he thought to himself the following evening, as he walked along the
      streets of St. Petersburg, “if the old Countess would but reveal her
      secret to me! if she would only tell me the names of the three winning
      cards. Why should I not try my fortune? I must get introduced to her and
      win her favour—become her lover... But all that will take time, and
      she is eighty-seven years old: she might be dead in a week, in a couple of
      days even!... But the story itself: can it really be true?... No! Economy,
      temperance and industry: those are my three winning cards; by means of
      them I shall be able to double my capital—increase it sevenfold, and
      procure for myself ease and independence.”
    

      Musing in this manner, he walked on until he found himself in one of the
      principal streets of St. Petersburg, in front of a house of antiquated
      architecture. The street was blocked with equipages; carriages one after
      the other drew up in front of the brilliantly illuminated doorway. At one
      moment there stepped out on to the pavement the well-shaped little foot of
      some young beauty, at another the heavy boot of a cavalry officer, and
      then the silk stockings and shoes of a member of the diplomatic world.
      Furs and cloaks passed in rapid succession before the gigantic porter at
      the entrance.
    

      Hermann stopped. “Whose house is this?” he asked of the
      watchman at the corner.
    

      “The Countess A——‘s,” replied the watchman.
    

      Hermann started. The strange story of the three cards again presented
      itself to his imagination. He began walking up and down before the house,
      thinking of its owner and her strange secret. Returning late to his modest
      lodging, he could not go to sleep for a long time, and when at last he did
      doze off, he could dream of nothing but cards, green tables, piles of
      banknotes and heaps of ducats. He played one card after the other, winning
      uninterruptedly, and then he gathered up the gold and filled his pockets
      with the notes. When he woke up late the next morning, he sighed over the
      loss of his imaginary wealth, and then sallying out into the town, he
      found himself once more in front of the Countess’s residence. Some
      unknown power seemed to have attracted him thither. He stopped and looked
      up at the windows. At one of these he saw a head with luxuriant black
      hair, which was bent down probably over some book or an embroidery frame.
      The head was raised. Hermann saw a fresh complexion and a pair of dark
      eyes. That moment decided his fate.
    

      III
    

Lizaveta Ivanovna
      had scarcely taken off her hat and cloak, when the Countess sent for her
      and again ordered her to get the carriage ready. The vehicle drew up
      before the door, and they prepared to take their seats. Just at the moment
      when two footmen were assisting the old lady to enter the carriage,
      Lizaveta saw her Engineer standing close beside the wheel; he grasped her
      hand; alarm caused her to lose her presence of mind, and the young man
      disappeared—but not before he had left a letter between her fingers.
      She concealed it in her glove, and during the whole of the drive she
      neither saw nor heard anything. It was the custom of the Countess, when
      out for an airing in her carriage, to be constantly asking such questions
      as: “Who was that person that met us just now? What is the name of
      this bridge? What is written on that signboard?” On this occasion,
      however, Lizaveta returned such vague and absurd answers, that the
      Countess became angry with her.
    

      “What is the matter with you, my dear?” she exclaimed. “Have
      you taken leave of your senses, or what is it? Do you not hear me or
      understand what I say?... Heaven be thanked, I am still in my right mind
      and speak plainly enough!”
    

      Lizaveta Ivanovna did not hear her. On returning home she ran to her room,
      and drew the letter out of her glove: it was not sealed. Lizaveta read it.
      The letter contained a declaration of love; it was tender, respectful, and
      copied word for word from a German novel. But Lizaveta did not know
      anything of the German language, and she was quite delighted.
    

      For all that, the letter caused her to feel exceedingly uneasy. For the
      first time in her life she was entering into secret and confidential
      relations with a young man. His boldness alarmed her. She reproached
      herself for her imprudent behaviour, and knew not what to do. Should she
      cease to sit at the window and, by assuming an appearance of indifference
      towards him, put a check upon the young officer’s desire for further
      acquaintance with her? Should she send his letter back to him, or should
      she answer him in a cold and decided manner? There was nobody to whom she
      could turn in her perplexity, for she had neither female friend nor
      adviser... At length she resolved to reply to him.
    

      She sat down at her little writing-table, took pen and paper, and began to
      think. Several times she began her letter, and then tore it up: the way
      she had expressed herself seemed to her either too inviting or too cold
      and decisive. At last she succeeded in writing a few lines with which she
      felt satisfied.
    

      “I am convinced,” she wrote, “that your intentions are
      honourable, and that you do not wish to offend me by any imprudent
      behaviour, but our acquaintance must not begin in such a manner. I return
      you your letter, and I hope that I shall never have any cause to complain
      of this undeserved slight.”
    

      The next day, as soon as Hermann made his appearance, Lizaveta rose from
      her embroidery, went into the drawing-room, opened the ventilator and
      threw the letter into the street, trusting that the young officer would
      have the perception to pick it up.
    

      Hermann hastened forward, picked it up and then repaired to a confectioner’s
      shop. Breaking the seal of the envelope, he found inside it his own letter
      and Lizaveta’s reply. He had expected this, and he returned home,
      his mind deeply occupied with his intrigue.
    

      Three days afterwards, a bright-eyed young girl from a milliner’s
      establishment brought Lizaveta a letter. Lizaveta opened it with great
      uneasiness, fearing that it was a demand for money, when suddenly she
      recognised Hermann’s hand-writing.
    

      “You have made a mistake, my dear,” said she: “this
      letter is not for me.”
    

      “Oh, yes, it is for you,” replied the girl, smiling very
      knowingly. “Have the goodness to read it.”
    

      Lizaveta glanced at the letter. Hermann requested an interview.
    

      “It cannot be,” she cried, alarmed at the audacious request,
      and the manner in which it was made. “This letter is certainly not
      for me.”
    

      And she tore it into fragments.
    

      “If the letter was not for you, why have you torn it up?” said
      the girl. “I should have given it back to the person who sent it.”
    

      “Be good enough, my dear,” said Lizaveta, disconcerted by this
      remark, “not to bring me any more letters for the future, and tell
      the person who sent you that he ought to be ashamed...”
    

      But Hermann was not the man to be thus put off. Every day Lizaveta
      received from him a letter, sent now in this way, now in that. They were
      no longer translated from the German. Hermann wrote them under the
      inspiration of passion, and spoke in his own language, and they bore full
      testimony to the inflexibility of his desire and the disordered condition
      of his uncontrollable imagination. Lizaveta no longer thought of sending
      them back to him: she became intoxicated with them and began to reply to
      them, and little by little her answers became longer and more
      affectionate. At last she threw out of the window to him the following
      letter:
    

      “This evening there is going to be a ball at the Embassy. The
      Countess will be there. We shall remain until two o’clock. You have
      now an opportunity of seeing me alone. As soon as the Countess is gone,
      the servants will very probably go out, and there will be nobody left but
      the Swiss, but he usually goes to sleep in his lodge. Come about half-past
      eleven. Walk straight upstairs. If you meet anybody in the ante-room, ask
      if the Countess is at home. You will be told ‘No,’ in which
      case there will be nothing left for you to do but to go away again. But it
      is most probable that you will meet nobody. The maidservants will all be
      together in one room. On leaving the ante-room, turn to the left, and walk
      straight on until you reach the Countess’s bedroom. In the bedroom,
      behind a screen, you will find two doors: the one on the right leads to a
      cabinet, which the Countess never enters; the one on the left leads to a
      corridor, at the end of which is a little winding staircase; this leads to
      my room.”
    

      Hermann trembled like a tiger, as he waited for the appointed time to
      arrive. At ten o’clock in the evening he was already in front of the
      Countess’s house. The weather was terrible; the wind blew with great
      violence; the sleety snow fell in large flakes; the lamps emitted a feeble
      light, the streets were deserted; from time to time a sledge, drawn by a
      sorry-looking hack, passed by, on the look-out for a belated passenger.
      Hermann was enveloped in a thick overcoat, and felt neither wind nor snow.
    

      At last the Countess’s carriage drew up. Hermann saw two footmen
      carry out in their arms the bent form of the old lady, wrapped in sable
      fur, and immediately behind her, clad in a warm mantle, and with her head
      ornamented with a wreath of fresh flowers, followed Lizaveta. The door was
      closed. The carriage rolled away heavily through the yielding snow. The
      porter shut the street-door; the windows became dark.
    

      Hermann began walking up and down near the deserted house; at length he
      stopped under a lamp, and glanced at his watch: it was twenty minutes past
      eleven. He remained standing under the lamp, his eyes fixed upon the
      watch, impatiently waiting for the remaining minutes to pass. At half-past
      eleven precisely, Hermann ascended the steps of the house, and made his
      way into the brightly-illuminated vestibule. The porter was not there.
      Hermann hastily ascended the staircase, opened the door of the ante-room
      and saw a footman sitting asleep in an antique chair by the side of a
      lamp. With a light firm step Hermann passed by him. The drawing-room and
      dining-room were in darkness, but a feeble reflection penetrated thither
      from the lamp in the ante-room.
    

      Hermann reached the Countess’s bedroom. Before a shrine, which was
      full of old images, a golden lamp was burning. Faded stuffed chairs and
      divans with soft cushions stood in melancholy symmetry around the room,
      the walls of which were hung with China silk. On one side of the room hung
      two portraits painted in Paris by Madame Lebrun. One of these represented
      a stout, red-faced man of about forty years of age in a bright-green
      uniform and with a star upon his breast; the other—a beautiful young
      woman, with an aquiline nose, forehead curls and a rose in her powdered
      hair. In the corners stood porcelain shepherds and shepherdesses,
      dining-room clocks from the workshop of the celebrated Lefroy, bandboxes,
      roulettes, fans and the various playthings for the amusement of ladies
      that were in vogue at the end of the last century, when Montgolfier’s
      balloons and Mesmer’s magnetism were the rage. Hermann stepped
      behind the screen. At the back of it stood a little iron bedstead; on the
      right was the door which led to the cabinet; on the left—the other
      which led to the corridor. He opened the latter, and saw the little
      winding staircase which led to the room of the poor companion... But he
      retraced his steps and entered the dark cabinet.
    

      The time passed slowly. All was still. The clock in the drawing-room
      struck twelve; the strokes echoed through the room one after the other,
      and everything was quiet again. Hermann stood leaning against the cold
      stove. He was calm; his heart beat regularly, like that of a man resolved
      upon a dangerous but inevitable undertaking. One o’clock in the
      morning struck; then two; and he heard the distant noise of
      carriage-wheels. An involuntary agitation took possession of him. The
      carriage drew near and stopped. He heard the sound of the carriage-steps
      being let down. All was bustle within the house. The servants were running
      hither and thither, there was a confusion of voices, and the rooms were
      lit up. Three antiquated chamber-maids entered the bedroom, and they were
      shortly afterwards followed by the Countess who, more dead than alive,
      sank into a Voltaire armchair. Hermann peeped through a chink. Lizaveta
      Ivanovna passed close by him, and he heard her hurried steps as she
      hastened up the little spiral staircase. For a moment his heart was
      assailed by something like a pricking of conscience, but the emotion was
      only transitory, and his heart became petrified as before.
    

      The Countess began to undress before her looking-glass. Her rose-bedecked
      cap was taken off, and then her powdered wig was removed from off her
      white and closely-cut hair. Hairpins fell in showers around her. Her
      yellow satin dress, brocaded with silver, fell down at her swollen feet.
    

      Hermann was a witness of the repugnant mysteries of her toilette; at last
      the Countess was in her night-cap and dressing-gown, and in this costume,
      more suitable to her age, she appeared less hideous and deformed.
    

      Like all old people in general, the Countess suffered from sleeplessness.
      Having undressed, she seated herself at the window in a Voltaire armchair
      and dismissed her maids. The candles were taken away, and once more the
      room was left with only one lamp burning in it. The Countess sat there
      looking quite yellow, mumbling with her flaccid lips and swaying to and
      fro. Her dull eyes expressed complete vacancy of mind, and, looking at
      her, one would have thought that the rocking of her body was not a
      voluntary action of her own, but was produced by the action of some
      concealed galvanic mechanism.
    

      Suddenly the death-like face assumed an inexplicable expression. The lips
      ceased to tremble, the eyes became animated: before the Countess stood an
      unknown man.
    

      “Do not be alarmed, for Heaven’s sake, do not be alarmed!”
      said he in a low but distinct voice. “I have no intention of doing
      you any harm, I have only come to ask a favour of you.”
    

      The old woman looked at him in silence, as if she had not heard what he
      had said. Hermann thought that she was deaf, and bending down towards her
      ear, he repeated what he had said. The aged Countess remained silent as
      before.
    

      “You can insure the happiness of my life,” continued Hermann,
      “and it will cost you nothing. I know that you can name three cards
      in order—”
    

      Hermann stopped. The Countess appeared now to understand what he wanted;
      she seemed as if seeking for words to reply.
    

      “It was a joke,” she replied at last: “I assure you it
      was only a joke.”
    

      “There is no joking about the matter,” replied Hermann
      angrily. “Remember Chaplitzky, whom you helped to win.”
    

      The Countess became visibly uneasy. Her features expressed strong emotion,
      but they quickly resumed their former immobility.
    

      “Can you not name me these three winning cards?” continued
      Hermann.
    

      The Countess remained silent; Hermann continued:
    

      “For whom are you preserving your secret? For your grandsons? They
      are rich enough without it; they do not know the worth of money. Your
      cards would be of no use to a spendthrift. He who cannot preserve his
      paternal inheritance, will die in want, even though he had a demon at his
      service. I am not a man of that sort; I know the value of money. Your
      three cards will not be thrown away upon me. Come!”...
    

      He paused and tremblingly awaited her reply. The Countess remained silent;
      Hermann fell upon his knees.
    

      “If your heart has ever known the feeling of love,” said he,
      “if you remember its rapture, if you have ever smiled at the cry of
      your new-born child, if any human feeling has ever entered into your
      breast, I entreat you by the feelings of a wife, a lover, a mother, by all
      that is most sacred in life, not to reject my prayer. Reveal to me your
      secret. Of what use is it to you?... May be it is connected with some
      terrible sin with the loss of eternal salvation, with some bargain with
      the devil... Reflect,—you are old; you have not long to live—I
      am ready to take your sins upon my soul. Only reveal to me your secret.
      Remember that the happiness of a man is in your hands, that not only I,
      but my children, and grandchildren will bless your memory and reverence
      you as a saint...”
    

      The old Countess answered not a word.
    

      Hermann rose to his feet.
    

      “You old hag!” he exclaimed, grinding his teeth, “then I
      will make you answer!”
    

      With these words he drew a pistol from his pocket.
    

      At the sight of the pistol, the Countess for the second time exhibited
      strong emotion. She shook her head and raised her hands as if to protect
      herself from the shot... then she fell backwards and remained motionless.
    

      “Come, an end to this childish nonsense!” said Hermann, taking
      hold of her hand. “I ask you for the last time: will you tell me the
      names of your three cards, or will you not?”
    

      The Countess made no reply. Hermann perceived that she was dead!
    

      IV
    

Lizaveta Ivanovna
      was sitting in her room, still in her ball dress, lost in deep thought. On
      returning home, she had hastily dismissed the chambermaid who very
      reluctantly came forward to assist her, saying that she would undress
      herself, and with a trembling heart had gone up to her own room, expecting
      to find Hermann there, but yet hoping not to find him. At the first glance
      she convinced herself that he was not there, and she thanked her fate for
      having prevented him keeping the appointment. She sat down without
      undressing, and began to recall to mind all the circumstances which in so
      short a time had carried her so far. It was not three weeks since the time
      when she first saw the young officer from the window—and yet she was
      already in correspondence with him, and he had succeeded in inducing her
      to grant him a nocturnal interview! She knew his name only through his
      having written it at the bottom of some of his letters; she had never
      spoken to him, had never heard his voice, and had never heard him spoken
      of until that evening. But, strange to say, that very evening at the ball,
      Tomsky, being piqued with the young Princess Pauline N——, who,
      contrary to her usual custom, did not flirt with him, wished to revenge
      himself by assuming an air of indifference: he therefore engaged Lizaveta
      Ivanovna and danced an endless mazurka with her. During the whole of the
      time he kept teasing her about her partiality for Engineer officers; he
      assured her that he knew far more than she imagined, and some of his jests
      were so happily aimed, that Lizaveta thought several times that her secret
      was known to him.
    

      “From whom have you learnt all this?” she asked, smiling.
    

      “From a friend of a person very well known to you,” replied
      Tomsky, “from a very distinguished man.”
    

      “And who is this distinguished man?”
    

      “His name is Hermann.”
    

      Lizaveta made no reply; but her hands and feet lost all sense of feeling.
    

      “This Hermann,” continued Tomsky, “is a man of romantic
      personality. He has the profile of a Napoleon, and the soul of a
      Mephistopheles. I believe that he has at least three crimes upon his
      conscience... How pale you have become!”
    

      “I have a headache... But what did this Hermann—or whatever
      his name is—tell you?”
    

      “Hermann is very much dissatisfied with his friend: he says that in
      his place he would act very differently... I even think that Hermann
      himself has designs upon you; at least, he listens very attentively to all
      that his friend has to say about you.”
    

      “And where has he seen me?”
    

      “In church, perhaps; or on the parade—God alone knows where.
      It may have been in your room, while you were asleep, for there is nothing
      that he—”
    

      Three ladies approaching him with the question: “oubli ou regret?”
      interrupted the conversation, which had become so tantalisingly
      interesting to Lizaveta.
    

      The lady chosen by Tomsky was the Princess Pauline herself. She succeeded
      in effecting a reconciliation with him during the numerous turns of the
      dance, after which he conducted her to her chair. On returning to his
      place, Tomsky thought no more either of Hermann or Lizaveta. She longed to
      renew the interrupted conversation, but the mazurka came to an end, and
      shortly afterwards the old Countess took her departure.
    

      Tomsky’s words were nothing more than the customary small talk of
      the dance, but they sank deep into the soul of the young dreamer. The
      portrait, sketched by Tomsky, coincided with the picture she had formed
      within her own mind, and thanks to the latest romances, the ordinary
      countenance of her admirer became invested with attributes capable of
      alarming her and fascinating her imagination at the same time. She was now
      sitting with her bare arms crossed and with her head, still adorned with
      flowers, sunk upon her uncovered bosom. Suddenly the door opened and
      Hermann entered. She shuddered.
    

      “Where were you?” she asked in a terrified whisper.
    

      “In the old Countess’s bedroom,” replied Hermann:
      “I have just left her. The Countess is dead.”
    

      “My God! What do you say?”
    

      “And I am afraid,” added Hermann, “that I am the cause
      of her death.”
    

      Lizaveta looked at him, and Tomsky’s words found an echo in her
      soul: “This man has at least three crimes upon his conscience!”
      Hermann sat down by the window near her, and related all that had
      happened.
    

      Lizaveta listened to him in terror. So all those passionate letters, those
      ardent desires, this bold obstinate pursuit—all this was not love!
      Money—that was what his soul yearned for! She could not satisfy his
      desire and make him happy! The poor girl had been nothing but the blind
      tool of a robber, of the murderer of her aged benefactress!... She wept
      bitter tears of agonised repentance. Hermann gazed at her in silence: his
      heart, too, was a prey to violent emotion, but neither the tears of the
      poor girl, nor the wonderful charm of her beauty, enhanced by her grief,
      could produce any impression upon his hardened soul. He felt no pricking
      of conscience at the thought of the dead old woman. One thing only grieved
      him: the irreparable loss of the secret from which he had expected to
      obtain great wealth.
    

      “You are a monster!” said Lizaveta at last.
    

      “I did not wish for her death,” replied Hermann: “my
      pistol was not loaded.”
    

      Both remained silent.
    

      The day began to dawn. Lizaveta extinguished her candle: a pale light
      illumined her room. She wiped her tear-stained eyes and raised them
      towards Hermann: he was sitting near the window, with his arms crossed and
      with a fierce frown upon his forehead. In this attitude he bore a striking
      resemblance to the portrait of Napoleon. This resemblance struck Lizaveta
      even.
    

      “How shall I get you out of the house?” said she at last.
      “I thought of conducting you down the secret staircase, but in that
      case it would be necessary to go through the Countess’s bedroom, and
      I am afraid.”
    

      “Tell me how to find this secret staircase—I will go alone.”
    

      Lizaveta arose, took from her drawer a key, handed it to Hermann and gave
      him the necessary instructions. Hermann pressed her cold, limp hand,
      kissed her bowed head, and left the room.
    

      He descended the winding staircase, and once more entered the Countess’s
      bedroom. The dead old lady sat as if petrified; her face expressed
      profound tranquillity. Hermann stopped before her, and gazed long and
      earnestly at her, as if he wished to convince himself of the terrible
      reality; at last he entered the cabinet, felt behind the tapestry for the
      door, and then began to descend the dark staircase, filled with strange
      emotions. “Down this very staircase,” thought he, “perhaps
      coming from the very same room, and at this very same hour sixty years
      ago, there may have glided, in an embroidered coat, with his hair dressed
      Ã  l’oiseau royal and pressing to his heart his three-cornered
      hat, some young gallant, who has long been mouldering in the grave, but
      the heart of his aged mistress has only to-day ceased to beat...”
    

      At the bottom of the staircase Hermann found a door, which he opened with
      a key, and then traversed a corridor which conducted him into the street.
    

      V
    

Three days after
      the fatal night, at nine o’clock in the morning, Hermann repaired to
      the Convent of ——, where the last honours were to be paid to
      the mortal remains of the old Countess. Although feeling no remorse, he
      could not altogether stifle the voice of conscience, which said to him:
      “You are the murderer of the old woman!” In spite of his
      entertaining very little religious belief, he was exceedingly
      superstitious; and believing that the dead Countess might exercise an evil
      influence on his life, he resolved to be present at her obsequies in order
      to implore her pardon.
    

      The church was full. It was with difficulty that Hermann made his way
      through the crowd of people. The coffin was placed upon a rich catafalque
      beneath a velvet baldachin. The deceased Countess lay within it, with her
      hands crossed upon her breast, with a lace cap upon her head and dressed
      in a white satin robe. Around the catafalque stood the members of her
      household: the servants in black caftans, with armorial ribbons
      upon their shoulders, and candles in their hands; the relatives—children,
      grandchildren, and great-grandchildren—in deep mourning.
    

      Nobody wept; tears would have been une affectation. The Countess
      was so old, that her death could have surprised nobody, and her relatives
      had long looked upon her as being out of the world. A famous preacher
      pronounced the funeral sermon. In simple and touching words he described
      the peaceful passing away of the righteous, who had passed long years in
      calm preparation for a Christian end. “The angel of death found her,”
      said the orator, “engaged in pious meditation and waiting for the
      midnight bridegroom.”
    

      The service concluded amidst profound silence. The relatives went forward
      first to take farewell of the corpse. Then followed the numerous guests,
      who had come to render the last homage to her who for so many years had
      been a participator in their frivolous amusements. After these followed
      the members of the Countess’s household. The last of these was an
      old woman of the same age as the deceased. Two young women led her forward
      by the hand. She had not strength enough to bow down to the ground—she
      merely shed a few tears and kissed the cold hand of her mistress.
    

      Hermann now resolved to approach the coffin. He knelt down upon the cold
      stones and remained in that position for some minutes; at last he arose,
      as pale as the deceased Countess herself; he ascended the steps of the
      catafalque and bent over the corpse... At that moment it seemed to him
      that the dead woman darted a mocking look at him and winked with one eye.
      Hermann started back, took a false step and fell to the ground. Several
      persons hurried forward and raised him up. At the same moment Lizaveta
      Ivanovna was borne fainting into the porch of the church. This episode
      disturbed for some minutes the solemnity of the gloomy ceremony. Among the
      congregation arose a deep murmur, and a tall thin chamberlain, a near
      relative of the deceased, whispered in the ear of an Englishman who was
      standing near him, that the young officer was a natural son of the
      Countess, to which the Englishman coldly replied: “Oh!”
    

      During the whole of that day, Hermann was strangely excited. Repairing to
      an out-of-the-way restaurant to dine, he drank a great deal of wine,
      contrary to his usual custom, in the hope of deadening his inward
      agitation. But the wine only served to excite his imagination still more.
      On returning home, he threw himself upon his bed without undressing, and
      fell into a deep sleep.
    

      When he woke up it was already night, and the moon was shining into the
      room. He looked at his watch: it was a quarter to three. Sleep had left
      him; he sat down upon his bed and thought of the funeral of the old
      Countess.
    

      At that moment somebody in the street looked in at his window, and
      immediately passed on again. Hermann paid no attention to this incident. A
      few moments afterwards he heard the door of his ante-room open. Hermann
      thought that it was his orderly, drunk as usual, returning from some
      nocturnal expedition, but presently he heard footsteps that were unknown
      to him: somebody was walking softly over the floor in slippers. The door
      opened, and a woman dressed in white, entered the room. Hermann mistook
      her for his old nurse, and wondered what could bring her there at that
      hour of the night. But the white woman glided rapidly across the room and
      stood before him—and Hermann recognised the Countess!
    

      “I have come to you against my wish,” she said in a firm
      voice: “but I have been ordered to grant your request. Three, seven,
      ace, will win for you if played in succession, but only on these
      conditions: that you do not play more than one card in twenty-four hours,
      and that you never play again during the rest of your life. I forgive you
      my death, on condition that you marry my companion, Lizaveta Ivanovna.”
    

      With these words she turned round very quietly, walked with a shuffling
      gait towards the door and disappeared. Hermann heard the street-door open
      and shut, and again he saw some one look in at him through the window.
    

      For a long time Hermann could not recover himself. He then rose up and
      entered the next room. His orderly was lying asleep upon the floor, and he
      had much difficulty in waking him. The orderly was drunk as usual, and no
      information could be obtained from him. The street-door was locked.
      Hermann returned to his room, lit his candle, and wrote down all the
      details of his vision.
    

      VI
    

Two fixed ideas can
      no more exist together in the moral world than two bodies can occupy one
      and the same place in the physical world. “Three, seven, ace,”
      soon drove out of Hermann’s mind the thought of the dead Countess.
      “Three, seven, ace,” were perpetually running through his head
      and continually being repeated by his lips. If he saw a young girl, he
      would say: “How slender she is! quite like the three of hearts.”
      If anybody asked: “What is the time?” he would reply: “Five
      minutes to seven.” Every stout man that he saw reminded him of the
      ace. “Three, seven, ace” haunted him in his sleep, and assumed
      all possible shapes. The threes bloomed before him in the forms of
      magnificent flowers, the sevens were represented by Gothic portals, and
      the aces became transformed into gigantic spiders. One thought alone
      occupied his whole mind—to make a profitable use of the secret which
      he had purchased so dearly. He thought of applying for a furlough so as to
      travel abroad. He wanted to go to Paris and tempt fortune in some of the
      public gambling-houses that abounded there. Chance spared him all this
      trouble.
    

      There was in Moscow a society of rich gamesters, presided over by the
      celebrated Chekalinsky, who had passed all his life at the card-table and
      had amassed millions, accepting bills of exchange for his winnings and
      paying his losses in ready money. His long experience secured for him the
      confidence of his companions, and his open house, his famous cook, and his
      agreeable and fascinating manners gained for him the respect of the
      public. He came to St. Petersburg. The young men of the capital flocked to
      his rooms, forgetting balls for cards, and preferring the emotions of faro
      to the seductions of flirting. Narumov conducted Hermann to Chekalinsky’s
      residence.
    

      They passed through a suite of magnificent rooms, filled with attentive
      domestics. The place was crowded. Generals and Privy Counsellors were
      playing at whist; young men were lolling carelessly upon the
      velvet-covered sofas, eating ices and smoking pipes. In the drawing-room,
      at the head of a long table, around which were assembled about a score of
      players, sat the master of the house keeping the bank. He was a man of
      about sixty years of age, of a very dignified appearance; his head was
      covered with silvery-white hair; his full, florid countenance expressed
      good-nature, and his eyes twinkled with a perpetual smile. Narumov
      introduced Hermann to him. Chekalinsky shook him by the hand in a friendly
      manner, requested him not to stand on ceremony, and then went on dealing.
    

      The game occupied some time. On the table lay more than thirty cards.
      Chekalinsky paused after each throw, in order to give the players time to
      arrange their cards and note down their losses, listened politely to their
      requests, and more politely still, put straight the corners of cards that
      some player’s hand had chanced to bend. At last the game was
      finished. Chekalinsky shuffled the cards and prepared to deal again.
    

      “Will you allow me to take a card?” said Hermann, stretching
      out his hand from behind a stout gentleman who was punting.
    

      Chekalinsky smiled and bowed silently, as a sign of acquiescence. Narumov
      laughingly congratulated Hermann on his abjuration of that abstention from
      cards which he had practised for so long a period, and wished him a lucky
      beginning.
    

      “Stake!” said Hermann, writing some figures with chalk on the
      back of his card.
    

      “How much?” asked the banker, contracting the muscles of his
      eyes; “excuse me, I cannot see quite clearly.”
    

      “Forty-seven thousand rubles,” replied Hermann.
    

      At these words every head in the room turned suddenly round, and all eyes
      were fixed upon Hermann.
    

      “He has taken leave of his senses!” thought Narumov.
    

      “Allow me to inform you,” said Chekalinsky, with his eternal
      smile, “that you are playing very high; nobody here has ever staked
      more than two hundred and seventy-five rubles at once.”
    

      “Very well,” replied Hermann; “but do you accept my card
      or not?”
    

      Chekalinsky bowed in token of consent.
    

      “I only wish to observe,” said he, “that although I have
      the greatest confidence in my friends, I can only play against ready
      money. For my own part, I am quite convinced that your word is sufficient,
      but for the sake of the order of the game, and to facilitate the reckoning
      up, I must ask you to put the money on your card.”
    

      Hermann drew from his pocket a bank-note and handed it to Chekalinsky,
      who, after examining it in a cursory manner, placed it on Hermann’s
      card.
    

      He began to deal. On the right a nine turned up, and on the left a three.
    

      “I have won!” said Hermann, showing his card.
    

      A murmur of astonishment arose among the players. Chekalinsky frowned, but
      the smile quickly returned to his face.
    

      “Do you wish me to settle with you?” he said to Hermann.
    

      “If you please,” replied the latter.
    

      Chekalinsky drew from his pocket a number of banknotes and paid at once.
      Hermann took up his money and left the table. Narumov could not recover
      from his astonishment. Hermann drank a glass of lemonade and returned
      home.
    

      The next evening he again repaired to Chekalinsky’s. The host was
      dealing. Hermann walked up to the table; the punters immediately made room
      for him. Chekalinsky greeted him with a gracious bow.
    

      Hermann waited for the next deal, took a card and placed upon it his
      forty-seven thousand roubles, together with his winnings of the previous
      evening.
    

      Chekalinsky began to deal. A knave turned up on the right, a seven on the
      left.
    

      Hermann showed his seven.
    

      There was a general exclamation. Chekalinsky was evidently ill at ease,
      but he counted out the ninety-four thousand rubles and handed them over to
      Hermann, who pocketed them in the coolest manner possible and immediately
      left the house.
    

      The next evening Hermann appeared again at the table. Every one was
      expecting him. The generals and Privy Counsellors left their whist in
      order to watch such extraordinary play. The young officers quitted their
      sofas, and even the servants crowded into the room. All pressed round
      Hermann. The other players left off punting, impatient to see how it would
      end. Hermann stood at the table and prepared to play alone against the
      pale, but still smiling Chekalinsky. Each opened a pack of cards.
      Chekalinsky shuffled. Hermann took a card and covered it with a pile of
      bank-notes. It was like a duel. Deep silence reigned around.
    

      Chekalinsky began to deal; his hands trembled. On the right a queen turned
      up, and on the left an ace.
    

      “Ace has won!” cried Hermann, showing his card.
    

      “Your queen has lost,” said Chekalinsky, politely.
    

      Hermann started; instead of an ace, there lay before him the queen of
      spades! He could not believe his eyes, nor could he understand how he had
      made such a mistake.
    

      At that moment it seemed to him that the queen of spades smiled ironically
      and winked her eye at him. He was struck by her remarkable resemblance...
    

      “The old Countess!” he exclaimed, seized with terror.
    

      Chekalinsky gathered up his winnings. For some time, Hermann remained
      perfectly motionless. When at last he left the table, there was a general
      commotion in the room.
    

      “Splendidly punted!” said the players. Chekalinsky shuffled
      the cards afresh, and the game went on as usual.
    








      Hermann went out of his mind, and is now confined in room Number 17 of the
      Obukhov Hospital. He never answers any questions, but he constantly
      mutters with unusual rapidity: “Three, seven, ace!” “Three,
      seven, queen!”
    

      Lizaveta Ivanovna has married a very amiable young man, a son of the
      former steward of the old Countess. He is in the service of the State
      somewhere, and is in receipt of a good income. Lizaveta is also supporting
      a poor relative.
    

      Tomsky has been promoted to the rank of captain, and has become the
      husband of the Princess Pauline.
    











      THE CLOAK
    

      BY NIKOLAY V. GOGOL
    

In the department
      of——, but it is better not to mention the department. The
      touchiest things in the world are departments, regiments, courts of
      justice, in a word, all branches of public service. Each individual
      nowadays thinks all society insulted in his person. Quite recently, a
      complaint was received from a district chief of police in which he plainly
      demonstrated that all the imperial institutions were going to the dogs,
      and that the Czar’s sacred name was being taken in vain; and in
      proof he appended to the complaint a romance, in which the district chief
      of police is made to appear about once in every ten pages, and sometimes
      in a downright drunken condition. Therefore, in order to avoid all
      unpleasantness, it will be better to designate the department in question,
      as a certain department.
    

      So, in a certain department there was a certain official—not a very
      notable one, it must be allowed—short of stature, somewhat
      pock-marked, red-haired, and mole-eyed, with a bald forehead, wrinkled
      cheeks, and a complexion of the kind known as sanguine. The St. Petersburg
      climate was responsible for this. As for his official rank—with us
      Russians the rank comes first—he was what is called a perpetual
      titular councillor, over which, as is well known, some writers make merry
      and crack their jokes, obeying the praiseworthy custom of attacking those
      who cannot bite back.
    

      His family name was Bashmachkin. This name is evidently derived from
      bashmak (shoe); but, when, at what time, and in what manner, is not known.
      His father and grandfather, and all the Bashmachkins, always wore boots,
      which were resoled two or three times a year. His name was Akaky
      Akakiyevich. It may strike the reader as rather singular and far-fetched;
      but he may rest assured that it was by no means far-fetched, and that the
      circumstances were such that it would have been impossible to give him any
      other.
    

      This was how it came about.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich was born, if my memory fails me not, in the evening on
      the 23rd of March. His mother, the wife of a Government official, and a
      very fine woman, made all due arrangements for having the child baptised.
      She was lying on the bed opposite the door; on her right stood the
      godfather, Ivan Ivanovich Eroshkin, a most estimable man, who served as
      the head clerk of the senate; and the godmother, Arina Semyonovna
      Bielobrinshkova, the wife of an officer of the quarter, and a woman of
      rare virtues. They offered the mother her choice of three names, Mokiya,
      Sossiya, or that the child should be called after the martyr Khozdazat.
      “No,” said the good woman, “all those names are poor.”
      In order to please her, they opened the calendar at another place; three
      more names appeared, Triphily, Dula, and Varakhasy. “This is awful,”
      said the old woman. “What names! I truly never heard the like. I
      might have put up with Varadat or Varukh, but not Triphily and Varakhasy!”
      They turned to another page and found Pavsikakhy and Vakhtisy. “Now
      I see,” said the old woman, “that it is plainly fate. And
      since such is the case, it will be better to name him after his father.
      His father’s name was Akaky, so let his son’s name be Akaky
      too.” In this manner he became Akaky Akakiyevich. They christened
      the child, whereat he wept, and made a grimace, as though he foresaw that
      he was to be a titular councillor.
    

      In this manner did it all come about. We have mentioned it in order that
      the reader might see for himself that it was a case of necessity, and that
      it was utterly impossible to give him any other name.
    

      When and how he entered the department, and who appointed him, no one
      could remember. However much the directors and chiefs of all kinds were
      changed, he was always to be seen in the same place, the same attitude,
      the same occupation—always the letter-copying clerk—so that it
      was afterwards affirmed that he had been born in uniform with a bald head.
      No respect was shown him in the department. The porter not only did not
      rise from his seat when he passed, but never even glanced at him, any more
      than if a fly had flown through the reception-room. His superiors treated
      him in coolly despotic fashion. Some insignificant assistant to the head
      clerk would thrust a paper under his nose without so much as saying,
      “Copy,” or, “Here’s an interesting little case,”
      or anything else agreeable, as is customary amongst well-bred officials.
      And he took it, looking only at the paper, and not observing who handed it
      to him, or whether he had the right to do so; simply took it, and set
      about copying it.
    

      The young officials laughed at and made fun of him, so far as their
      official wit permitted; told in his presence various stories concocted
      about him, and about his landlady, an old woman of seventy; declared that
      she beat him; asked when the wedding was to be; and strewed bits of paper
      over his head, calling them snow. But Akaky Akakiyevich answered not a
      word, any more than if there had been no one there besides himself. It
      even had no effect upon his work. Amid all these annoyances he never made
      a single mistake in a letter. But if the joking became wholly unbearable,
      as when they jogged his head, and prevented his attending to his work, he
      would exclaim:
    

      “Leave me alone! Why do you insult me?”
    

      And there was something strange in the words and the voice in which they
      were uttered. There was in it something which moved to pity; so much so
      that one young man, a newcomer, who, taking pattern by the others, had
      permitted himself to make sport of Akaky, suddenly stopped short, as
      though all about him had undergone a transformation, and presented itself
      in a different aspect. Some unseen force repelled him from the comrades
      whose acquaintance he had made, on the supposition that they were decent,
      well-bred men. Long afterwards, in his gayest moments, there recurred to
      his mind the little official with the bald forehead, with his
      heart-rending words, “Leave me alone! Why do you insult me?”
      In these moving words, other words resounded—“I am thy
      brother.” And the young man covered his face with his hand; and many
      a time afterwards, in the course of his life, shuddered at seeing how much
      inhumanity there is in man, how much savage coarseness is concealed
      beneath refined, cultured, worldly refinement, and even, O God! in that
      man whom the world acknowledges as honourable and upright.
    

      It would be difficult to find another man who lived so entirely for his
      duties. It is not enough to say that Akaky laboured with zeal; no, he
      laboured with love. In his copying, he found a varied and agreeable
      employment. Enjoyment was written on his face; some letters were even
      favourites with him; and when he encountered these, he smiled, winked, and
      worked with his lips, till it seemed as though each letter might be read
      in his face, as his pen traced it. If his pay had been in proportion to
      his zeal, he would, perhaps, to his great surprise, have been made even a
      councillor of state. But he worked, as his companions, the wits, put it,
      like a horse in a mill.
    

      However, it would be untrue to say that no attention was paid to him. One
      director being a kindly man, and desirous of rewarding him for his long
      service, ordered him to be given something more important than mere
      copying. So he was ordered to make a report of an already concluded
      affair, to another department; the duty consisting simply in changing the
      heading and altering a few words from the first to the third person. This
      caused him so much toil, that he broke into a perspiration, rubbed his
      forehead, and finally said, “No, give me rather something to copy.”
      After that they let him copy on forever.
    

      Outside this copying, it appeared that nothing existed for him. He gave no
      thought to his clothes. His uniform was not green, but a sort of
      rusty-meal colour. The collar was low, so that his neck, in spite of the
      fact that it was not long, seemed inordinately so as it emerged from it,
      like the necks of the plaster cats which pedlars carry about on their
      heads. And something was always sticking to his uniform, either a bit of
      hay or some trifle. Moreover, he had a peculiar knack, as he walked along
      the street, of arriving beneath a window just as all sorts of rubbish was
      being flung out of it; hence he always bore about on his hat scraps of
      melon rinds, and other such articles. Never once in his life did he give
      heed to what was going on every day to the street; while it is well known
      that his young brother officials trained the range of their glances till
      they could see when any one’s trouser-straps came undone upon the
      opposite sidewalk, which always brought a malicious smile to their faces.
      But Akaky Akakiyevich saw in all things the clean, even strokes of his
      written lines; and only when a horse thrust his nose, from some unknown
      quarter, over his shoulder, and sent a whole gust of wind down his neck
      from his nostrils, did he observe that he was not in the middle of a line,
      but in the middle of the street.
    

      On reaching home, he sat down at once at the table, sipped his
      cabbage-soup up quickly, and swallowed a bit of beef with onions, never
      noticing their taste, and gulping down everything with flies and anything
      else which the Lord happened to send at the moment. When he saw that his
      stomach was beginning to swell, he rose from the table, and copied papers
      which he had brought home. If there happened to be none, he took copies
      for himself, for his own gratification, especially if the document was
      noteworthy, not on account of its style, but of its being addressed to
      some distinguished person.
    

      Even at the hour when the grey St. Petersburg sky had quite disappeared,
      and all the official world had eaten or dined, each as he could, in
      accordance with the salary he received and his own fancy; when, all were
      resting from the department jar of pens, running to and fro, for their own
      and other people’s indispensable occupations’, and from all
      the work that an uneasy man makes willingly for himself, rather than what
      is necessary; when, officials hasten to dedicate to pleasure the time
      which is left to them, one bolder than the rest, going to the theatre;
      another; into the street looking under the bonnets; another, wasting his
      evening in compliments to some pretty girl, the star of a small official
      circle; another—and this is the common case of all—visiting
      his comrades on the third or fourth floor, in two small rooms with an
      ante-room or kitchen, and some pretensions to fashion, such as a lamp or
      some other trifle which has cost many a sacrifice of dinner or pleasure
      trip; in a word, at the hour when all officials disperse among the
      contracted quarters of their friends, to play whist, as they sip their tea
      from glasses with a kopek’s worth of sugar, smoke long pipes, relate
      at time some bits of gossip which a Russian man can never, under any
      circumstances, refrain from, and when there is nothing else to talk of,
      repeat eternal anecdotes about the commandant to whom they had sent word
      that the tails of the horses on the Falconet Monument had been cut off;
      when all strive to divert themselves, Akaky Akakiyevich indulged in no
      kind of diversion. No one could even say that he had seen him at any kind
      of evening party. Having written to his heart’s content, he lay down
      to sleep, smiling at the thought of the coming day—of what God might
      send him to copy on the morrow.
    

      Thus flowed on the peaceful life of the man, who, with a salary of four
      hundred rubles, understood how to be content with his lot; and thus it
      would have continued to flow on, perhaps, to extreme old age, were it not
      that there are various ills strewn along the path of life for titular
      councillors as well as for private, actual, court, and every other species
      of councillor, even to those who never give any advice or take any
      themselves.
    

      There exists in St. Petersburg a powerful foe of all who receive a salary
      of four hundred rubles a year, or there-abouts. This foe is no other than
      the Northern cold, although it is said to be very healthy. At nine o’clock
      in the morning, at the very hour when the streets are filled with men
      bound for the various official departments, it begins to bestow such
      powerful and piercing nips on all noses impartially, that the poor
      officials really do not know what to do with them. At an hour, when the
      foreheads of even those who occupy exalted positions ache with the cold,
      and tears start to their eyes, the poor titular councillors are sometimes
      quite unprotected. Their only salvation lies in traversing as quickly as
      possible, in their thin little cloaks, five or six streets, and then
      warming their feet in the porter’s room, and so thawing all their
      talents and qualifications for official service, which had become frozen
      on the way.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich had felt for some time that his back and shoulders were
      paining with peculiar poignancy, in spite of the fact that he tried to
      traverse the distance with all possible speed. He began finally to wonder
      whether the fault did not lie in his cloak. He examined it thoroughly at
      home, and discovered that in two places, namely, on the back and
      shoulders, it had become thin as gauze. The cloth was worn to such a
      degree that he could see through it, and the lining had fallen into
      pieces. You must know that Akaky Akakiyevich’s cloak served as an
      object of ridicule to the officials. They even refused it the noble name
      of cloak, and called it a cape. In fact, it was of singular make, its
      collar diminishing year by year to serve to patch its other parts. The
      patching did not exhibit great skill on the part of the tailor, and was,
      in fact, baggy and ugly. Seeing how the matter stood, Akaky Akakiyevich
      decided that it would be necessary to take the cloak to Petrovich, the
      tailor, who lived somewhere on the fourth floor up a dark staircase, and
      who, in spite of his having but one eye and pock-marks all over his face,
      busied himself with considerable success in repairing the trousers and
      coats of officials and others; that is to say, when he was sober and not
      nursing some other scheme in his head.
    

      It is not necessary to say much about this tailor, but as it is the custom
      to have the character of each personage in a novel clearly defined there
      is no help for it, so here is Petrovich the tailor. At first he was called
      only Grigory, and was some gentleman’s serf. He commenced calling
      himself Petrovich from the time when he received his free papers, and
      further began to drink heavily on all holidays, at first on the great
      ones, and then on all church festivals without discrimination, wherever a
      cross stood in the calendar. On this point he was faithful to ancestral
      custom; and when quarrelling with his wife, he called her a low female and
      a German. As we have mentioned his wife, it will be necessary to say a
      word or two about her. Unfortunately, little is known of her beyond the
      fact that Petrovich had a wife, who wore a cap and a dress, but could not
      lay claim to beauty, at least, no one but the soldiers of the guard even
      looked under her cap when they met her.
    

      Ascending the staircase which led to Petrovich’s room—which
      staircase was all soaked with dish-water and reeked with the smell of
      spirits which affects the eyes, and is an inevitable adjunct to all dark
      stairways in St. Petersburg houses—ascending the stairs, Akaky
      Akakiyevich pondered how much Petrovich would ask, and mentally resolved
      not to give more than two rubles. The door was open, for the mistress, in
      cooking some fish, had raised such a smoke in the kitchen that not even
      the beetles were visible. Akaky Akakiyevich passed through the kitchen
      unperceived, even by the housewife, and at length reached a room where he
      beheld Petrovich seated on a large unpainted table, with his legs tucked
      under him like a Turkish pasha. His feet were bare, after the fashion of
      tailors as they sit at work; and the first thing which caught the eye was
      his thumb, with a deformed nail thick and strong as a turtle’s
      shell. About Petrovich’s neck hung a skein of silk and thread, and
      upon his knees lay some old garment. He had been trying unsuccessfully for
      three minutes to thread his needle, and was enraged at the darkness and
      even at the thread, growling in a low voice, “It won’t go
      through, the barbarian! you pricked me, you rascal!”
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich was vexed at arriving at the precise moment when
      Petrovich was angry. He liked to order something of Petrovich when he was
      a little downhearted, or, as his wife expressed it, “when he had
      settled himself with brandy, the one-eyed devil!” Under such
      circumstances Petrovich generally came down in his price very readily, and
      even bowed and returned thanks. Afterwards, to be sure, his wife would
      come, complaining that her husband had been drunk, and so had fixed the
      price too low; but, if only a ten-kopek piece were added then the matter
      would be settled. But now it appeared that Petrovich was in a sober
      condition, and therefore rough, taciturn, and inclined to demand, Satan
      only knows what price. Akaky Akakiyevich felt this, and would gladly have
      beat a retreat, but he was in for it. Petrovich screwed up his one eye
      very intently at him, and Akaky Akakiyevich involuntarily said, “How
      do you do, Petrovich?”
    

      “I wish you a good morning, sir,” said Petrovich squinting at
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s hands, to see what sort of booty he had brought.
    

      “Ah! I—to you, Petrovich, this—” It must be known
      that Akaky Akakiyevich expressed himself chiefly by prepositions, adverbs,
      and scraps of phrases which had no meaning whatever. If the matter was a
      very difficult one, he had a habit of never completing his sentences, so
      that frequently, having begun a phrase with the words, “This, in
      fact, is quite—” he forgot to go on, thinking he had already
      finished it.
    

      “What is it?” asked Petrovich, and with his one eye scanned
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s whole uniform from the collar down to the cuffs,
      the back, the tails and the button-holes, all of which were well known to
      him, since they were his own handiwork. Such is the habit of tailors; it
      is the first thing they do on meeting one.
    

      “But I, here, this—Petrovich—a cloak, cloth—here
      you see, everywhere, in different places, it is quite strong—it is a
      little dusty and looks old, but it is new, only here in one place it is a
      little—on the back, and here on one of the shoulders, it is a little
      worn, yes, here on this shoulder it is a little—do you see? That is
      all. And a little work—”
    

      Petrovich took the cloak, spread it out, to begin with, on the table,
      looked at it hard, shook his head, reached out his hand to the window-sill
      for his snuff-box, adorned with the portrait of some general, though what
      general is unknown, for the place where the face should have been had been
      rubbed through by the finger and a square bit of paper had been pasted
      over it. Having taken a pinch of snuff, Petrovich held up the cloak, and
      inspected it against the light, and again shook his head. Then he turned
      it, lining upwards, and shook his head once more. After which he again
      lifted the general-adorned lid with its bit of pasted paper, and having
      stuffed his nose with snuff, dosed and put away the snuff-box, and said
      finally, “No, it is impossible to mend it. It is a wretched garment!”
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich’s heart sank at these words.
    

      “Why is it impossible, Petrovich?” he said, almost in the
      pleading voice of a child. “All that ails it is, that it is worn on
      the shoulders. You must have some pieces—”
    

      “Yes, patches could be found, patches are easily found,” said
      Petrovich, “but there’s nothing to sew them to. The thing is
      completely rotten. If you put a needle to it—see, it will give way.”
    

      “Let it give way, and you can put on another patch at once.”
    

      “But there is nothing to put the patches on to. There’s no use
      in strengthening it. It is too far gone. It’s lucky that it’s
      cloth, for, if the wind were to blow, it would fly away.”
    

      “Well, strengthen it again. How this, in fact—”
    

      “No,” said Petrovich decisively, “there is nothing to be
      done with it. It’s a thoroughly bad job. You’d better, when
      the cold winter weather comes on, make yourself some gaiters out of it,
      because stockings are not warm. The Germans invented them in order to make
      more money.” Petrovich loved on all occasions to have a fling at the
      Germans. “But it is plain you must have a new cloak.”
    

      At the word “new” all grew dark before Akaky Akakiyevich’s
      eyes, and everything in the room began to whirl round. The only thing he
      saw clearly was the general with the paper face on the lid of Petrovich’s
      snuff-box. “A new one?” said he, as if still in a dream.
      “Why, I have no money for that.”
    

      “Yes, a new one,” said Petrovich, with barbarous composure.
    

      “Well, if it came to a new one, how—it—”
    

      “You mean how much would it cost?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “Well, you would have to lay out a hundred and fifty or more,”
      said Petrovich, and pursed up his lips significantly. He liked to produce
      powerful effects, liked to stun utterly and suddenly, and then to glance
      sideways to see what face the stunned person would put on the matter.
    

      “A hundred and fifty rubles for a cloak!” shrieked poor Akaky
      Akakiyevich, perhaps for the first time in his life, for his voice had
      always been distinguished for softness.
    

      “Yes, sir,” said Petrovich, “for any kind of cloak. If
      you have a marten fur on the collar, or a silk-lined hood, it will mount
      up to two hundred.”
    

      “Petrovich, please,” said Akaky Akakiyevich in a beseeching
      tone, not hearing, and not trying to hear, Petrovich’s words, and
      disregarding all his “effects,” “some repairs, in order
      that it may wear yet a little longer.”
    

      “No, it would only be a waste of time and money,” said
      Petrovich. And Akaky Akakiyevich went away after these words, utterly
      discouraged. But Petrovich stood for some time after his departure, with
      significantly compressed lips, and without betaking himself to his work,
      satisfied that he would not be dropped, and an artistic tailor employed.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich went out into the street as if in a dream. “Such
      an affair!” he said to himself. “I did not think it had come
      to—” and then after a pause, he added, “Well, so it is!
      see what it has come to at last! and I never imagined that it was so!”
      Then followed a long silence, after which he exclaimed, “Well, so it
      is! see what already—nothing unexpected that—it would be
      nothing—what a strange circumstance!” So saying, instead of
      going home, he went in exactly the opposite direction without suspecting
      it. On the way, a chimney-sweep bumped up against him, and blackened his
      shoulder, and a whole hatful of rubbish landed on him from the top of a
      house which was building. He did not notice it, and only when he ran
      against a watchman, who, having planted his halberd beside him, was
      shaking some snuff from his box into his horny hand, did he recover
      himself a little, and that because the watchman said, “Why are you
      poking yourself into a man’s very face? Haven’t you the
      pavement?” This caused him to look about him, and turn towards home.
    

      There only, he finally began to collect his thoughts, and to survey his
      position in its clear and actual light, and to argue with himself,
      sensibly and frankly, as with a reasonable friend, with whom one can
      discuss private and personal matters. “No,” said Akaky
      Akakiyevich, “it is impossible to reason with Petrovich now. He is
      that—evidently, his wife has been beating him. I’d better go
      to him on Sunday morning. After Saturday night he will be a little
      cross-eyed and sleepy, for he will want to get drunk, and his wife won’t
      give him any money, and at such a time, a ten-kopek piece in his hand will—he
      will become more fit to reason with, and then the cloak and that—”
      Thus argued Akaky Akakiyevich with himself regained his courage, and
      waited until the first Sunday, when, seeing from afar that Petrovich’s
      wife had left the house, he went straight to him.
    

      Petrovich’s eye was indeed very much askew after Saturday. His head
      drooped, and he was very sleepy; but for all that, as soon as he knew what
      it was a question of, it seemed as though Satan jogged his memory. “Impossible,”
      said he. “Please to order a new one.” Thereupon Akaky
      Akakiyevich handed over the ten-kopek piece. “Thank you, sir. I will
      drink your good health,” said Petrovich. “But as for the
      cloak, don’t trouble yourself about it; it is good for nothing. I
      will make you a capital new one, so let us settle about it now.”
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich was still for mending it, but Petrovich would not hear
      of it, and said, “I shall certainly have to make you a new one, and
      you may depend upon it that I shall do my best. It may even be, as the
      fashion goes, that the collar can be fastened by silver hooks under a
      flap.”
    

      Then Akaky Akakiyevich saw that it was impossible to get along without a
      new cloak, and his spirit sank utterly. How, in fact, was it to be done?
      Where was the money to come from? He must have some new trousers, and pay
      a debt of long standing to the shoemaker for putting new tops to his old
      boots, and he must order three shirts from the seamstress, and a couple of
      pieces of linen. In short, all his money must be spent. And even if the
      director should be so kind as to order him to receive forty-five or even
      fifty rubles instead of forty, it would be a mere nothing, a mere drop in
      the ocean towards the funds necessary for a cloak, although he knew that
      Petrovich was often wrong-headed enough to blurt out some outrageous
      price, so that even his own wife could not refrain from exclaiming,
      “Have you lost your senses, you fool?” At one time he would
      not work at any price, and now it was quite likely that he had named a
      higher sum than the cloak would cost.
    

      But although he knew that Petrovich would undertake to make a cloak for
      eighty rubles, still, where was he to get the eighty rubles from? He might
      possibly manage half. Yes, half might be procured, but where was the other
      half to come from? But the reader must first be told where the first half
      came from.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich had a habit of putting, for every ruble he spent, a
      groschen into a small box, fastened with lock and key, and with a slit in
      the top for the reception of money. At the end of every half-year he
      counted over the heap of coppers, and changed it for silver. This he had
      done for a long time, and in the course of years, the sum had mounted up
      to over forty rubles. Thus he had one half on hand. But where was he to
      find the other half? Where was he to get another forty rubles from? Akaky
      Akakiyevich thought and thought, and decided that it would be necessary to
      curtail his ordinary expenses, for the space of one year at least, to
      dispense with tea in the evening, to burn no candles, and, if there was
      anything which he must do, to go into his landlady’s room, and work
      by her light. When he went into the street, he must walk as lightly as he
      could, and as cautiously, upon the stones, almost upon tiptoe, in order
      not to wear his heels down in too short a time. He must give the laundress
      as little to wash as possible; and, in order not to wear out his clothes,
      he must take them off as soon as he got home, and wear only his cotton
      dressing-gown, which had been long and carefully saved.
    

      To tell the truth, it was a little hard for him at first to accustom
      himself to these deprivations. But he got used to them at length, after a
      fashion, and all went smoothly. He even got used to being hungry in the
      evening, but he made up for it by treating himself, so to say, in spirit,
      by bearing ever in mind the idea of his future cloak. From that time
      forth, his existence seemed to become, in some way, fuller, as if he were
      married, or as if some other man lived in him, as if, in fact, he were not
      alone, and some pleasant friend had consented to travel along life’s
      path with him, the friend being no other than the cloak, with thick
      wadding and a strong lining incapable of wearing out. He became more
      lively, and even his character grew firmer, like that of a man who has
      made up his mind, and set himself a goal. From his face and gait, doubt
      and indecision, all hesitating and wavering disappeared of themselves.
      Fire gleamed in his eyes, and occasionally the boldest and most daring
      ideas flitted through his mind. Why not, for instance, have marten fur on
      the collar? The thought of this almost made him absent-minded. Once, in
      copying a letter, he nearly made a mistake, so that he exclaimed almost
      aloud, “Ugh!” and crossed himself. Once, in the course of
      every month, he had a conference with Petrovich on the subject of the
      cloak, where it would be better to buy the cloth, and the colour, and the
      price. He always returned home satisfied, though troubled, reflecting that
      the time would come at last when it could all be bought, and then the
      cloak made.
    

      The affair progressed more briskly than he had expected. For beyond all
      his hopes, the director awarded neither forty nor forty-five rubles for
      Akaky Akakiyevich’s share, but sixty. Whether he suspected that
      Akaky Akakiyevich needed a cloak, or whether it was merely chance, at all
      events, twenty extra rubles were by this means provided. This circumstance
      hastened matters. Two or three months more of hunger and Akaky Akakiyevich
      had accumulated about eighty rubles. His heart, generally so quiet, began
      to throb. On the first possible day, he went shopping in company with
      Petrovich. They bought some very good cloth, and at a reasonable rate too,
      for they had been considering the matter for six months, and rarely let a
      month pass without their visiting the shops to enquire prices. Petrovich
      himself said that no better cloth could be had. For lining, they selected
      a cotton stuff, but so firm and thick, that Petrovich declared it to be
      better than silk, and even prettier and more glossy. They did not buy the
      marten fur, because it was, in fact, dear, but in its stead, they picked
      out the very best of cat-skin which could be found in the shop, and which
      might, indeed, be taken for marten at a distance.
    

      Petrovich worked at the cloak two whole weeks, for there was a great deal
      of quilting; otherwise it would have been finished sooner. He charged
      twelve rubles for the job, it could not possibly have been done for less.
      It was all sewed with silk, in small, double seams, and Petrovich went
      over each seam afterwards with his own teeth, stamping in various
      patterns.
    

      It was—it is difficult to say precisely on what day, but probably
      the most glorious one in Akaky Akakiyevich’s life, when Petrovich at
      length brought home the cloak. He brought it in the morning, before the
      hour when it was necessary to start for the department. Never did a cloak
      arrive so exactly in the nick of time, for the severe cold had set in, and
      it seemed to threaten to increase. Petrovich brought the cloak himself as
      befits a good tailor. On his countenance was a significant expression,
      such as Akaky Akakiyevich had never beheld there. He seemed fully sensible
      that he had done no small deed, and crossed a gulf separating tailors who
      put in linings, and execute repairs, from those who make new things. He
      took the cloak out of the pocket-handkerchief in which he had brought it.
      The handkerchief was fresh from the laundress, and he put it in his pocket
      for use. Taking out the cloak, he gazed proudly at it, held it up with
      both hands, and flung it skilfully over the shoulders of Akaky
      Akakiyevich. Then he pulled it and fitted it down behind with his hand,
      and he draped it around Akaky Akakiyevich without buttoning it. Akaky
      Akakiyevich, like an experienced man, wished to try the sleeves. Petrovich
      helped him on with them, and it turned out that the sleeves were
      satisfactory also. In short, the cloak appeared to be perfect, and most
      seasonable. Petrovich did not neglect to observe that it was only because
      he lived in a narrow street, and had no signboard, and had known Akaky
      Akakiyevich so long, that he had made it so cheaply; but that if he had
      been in business on the Nevsky Prospect, he would have charged
      seventy-five rubles for the making alone. Akaky Akakiyevich did not care
      to argue this point with Petrovich. He paid him, thanked him, and set out
      at once in his new cloak for the department. Petrovich followed him, and
      pausing in the street, gazed long at the cloak in the distance, after
      which he went to one side expressly to run through a crooked alley, and
      emerge again into the street beyond to gaze once more upon the cloak from
      another point, namely, directly in front.
    

      Meantime Akaky Akakiyevich went on in holiday mood. He was conscious every
      second of the time that he had a new cloak on his shoulders, and several
      times he laughed with internal satisfaction. In fact, there were two
      advantages, one was its warmth, the other its beauty. He saw nothing of
      the road, but suddenly found himself at the department. He took off his
      cloak in the ante-room, looked it over carefully, and confided it to the
      special care of the attendant. It is impossible to say precisely how it
      was that every one in the department knew at once that Akaky Akakiyevich
      had a new cloak, and that the “cape” no longer existed. All
      rushed at the same moment into the ante-room to inspect it. They
      congratulated him, and said pleasant things to him, so that he began at
      first to smile, and then to grow ashamed. When all surrounded him, and
      said that the new cloak must be “christened,” and that he must
      at least give them all a party, Akaky Akakiyevich lost his head
      completely, and did not know where he stood, what to answer, or how to get
      out of it. He stood blushing all over for several minutes, trying to
      assure them with great simplicity that it was not a new cloak, that it was
      in fact the old “cape.”
    

      At length one of the officials, assistant to the head clerk, in order to
      show that he was not at all proud, and on good terms with his inferiors,
      said:
    

      “So be it, only I will give the party instead of Akaky Akakiyevich;
      I invite you all to tea with me to-night. It just happens to be my
      name-day too.”
    

      The officials naturally at once offered the assistant clerk their
      congratulations, and accepted the invitation with pleasure. Akaky
      Akakiyevich would have declined; but all declared that it was
      discourteous, that it was simply a sin and a shame, and that he could not
      possibly refuse. Besides, the notion became pleasant to him when he
      recollected that he should thereby have a chance of wearing his new cloak
      in the evening also.
    

      That whole day was truly a most triumphant festival for Akaky Akakiyevich.
      He returned home in the most happy frame of mind, took off his cloak, and
      hung it carefully on the wall, admiring afresh the cloth and the lining.
      Then he brought out his old, worn-out cloak, for comparison. He looked at
      it, and laughed, so vast was the difference. And long after dinner he
      laughed again when the condition of the “cape” recurred to his
      mind. He dined cheerfully, and after dinner wrote nothing, but took his
      ease for a while on the bed, until it got dark. Then he dressed himself
      leisurely, put on his cloak, and stepped out into the street.
    

      Where the host lived, unfortunately we cannot say. Our memory begins to
      fail us badly. The houses and streets in St. Petersburg have become so
      mixed up in our head that it is very difficult to get anything out of it
      again in proper form. This much is certain, that the official lived in the
      best part of the city; and therefore it must have been anything but near
      to Akaky Akakiyevich’s residence. Akaky Akakiyevich was first
      obliged to traverse a kind of wilderness of deserted, dimly-lighted
      streets. But in proportion as he approached the official’s quarter
      of the city, the streets became more lively, more populous, and more
      brilliantly illuminated. Pedestrians began to appear; handsomely dressed
      ladies were more frequently encountered; the men had otter skin collars to
      their coats; shabby sleigh-men with their wooden, railed sledges stuck
      over with brass-headed nails, became rarer; whilst on the other hand, more
      and more drivers in red velvet caps, lacquered sledges and bear-skin coats
      began to appear, and carriages with rich hammer-cloths flew swiftly
      through the streets, their wheels scrunching the snow.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich gazed upon all this as upon a novel sight. He had not
      been in the streets during the evening for years. He halted out of
      curiosity before a shop-window, to look at a picture representing a
      handsome woman, who had thrown off her shoe, thereby baring her whole foot
      in a very pretty way; whilst behind her the head of a man with whiskers
      and a handsome moustache peeped through the doorway of another room. Akaky
      Akakiyevich shook his head, and laughed, and then went on his way. Why did
      he laugh? Either because he had met with a thing utterly unknown, but for
      which every one cherishes, nevertheless, some sort of feeling, or else he
      thought, like many officials, “Well, those French! What is to be
      said? If they do go in for anything of that sort, why—” But
      possibly he did not think at all.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich at length reached the house in which the head clerk’s
      assistant lodged. He lived in fine style. The staircase was lit by a lamp,
      his apartment being on the second floor. On entering the vestibule, Akaky
      Akakiyevich beheld a whole row of goloshes on the floor. Among them, in
      the centre of the room, stood a samovar, humming and emitting clouds of
      steam. On the walls hung all sorts of coats and cloaks, among which there
      were even some with beaver collars, or velvet facings. Beyond, the buzz of
      conversation was audible, and became clear and loud, when the servant came
      out with a trayful of empty glasses, cream-jugs and sugar-bowls. It was
      evident that the officials had arrived long before, and had already
      finished their first glass of tea.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich, having hung up his own cloak, entered the inner room.
      Before him all at once appeared lights, officials, pipes, and card-tables,
      and he was bewildered by a sound of rapid conversation rising from all the
      tables, and the noise of moving chairs. He halted very awkwardly in the
      middle of the room, wondering what he ought to do. But they had seen him.
      They received him with a shout, and all thronged at once into the
      ante-room, and there took another look at his cloak. Akaky Akakiyevich,
      although somewhat confused, was frank-hearted, and could not refrain from
      rejoicing when he saw how they praised his cloak. Then, of course, they
      all dropped him and his cloak, and returned, as was proper, to the tables
      set out for whist.
    

      All this, the noise, the talk, and the throng of people, was rather
      overwhelming to Akaky Akakiyevich. He simply did not know where he stood,
      or where to put his hands, his feet, and his whole body. Finally he sat
      down by the players, looked at the cards, gazed at the face of one and
      another, and after a while began to gape, and to feel that it was
      wearisome, the more so, as the hour was already long past when he usually
      went to bed. He wanted to take leave of the host, but they would not let
      him go, saying that he must not fail to drink a glass of champagne, in
      honour of his new garment. In the course of an hour, supper, consisting of
      vegetable salad, cold veal, pastry, confectioner’s pies, and
      champagne, was served. They made Akaky Akakiyevich drink two glasses of
      champagne, after which he felt things grow livelier.
    

      Still, he could not forget that it was twelve o’clock, and that he
      should have been at home long ago. In order that the host might not think
      of some excuse for detaining him, he stole out of the room quickly, sought
      out, in the ante-room, his cloak, which, to his sorrow, he found lying on
      the floor, brushed it, picked off every speck upon it, put it on his
      shoulders, and descended the stairs to the street.
    

      In the street all was still bright. Some petty shops, those permanent
      clubs of servants and all sorts of folks, were open. Others were shut,
      but, nevertheless, showed a streak of light the whole length of the
      door-crack, indicating that they were not yet free of company, and that
      probably some domestics, male and female, were finishing their stories and
      conversations, whilst leaving their masters in complete ignorance as to
      their whereabouts. Akaky Akakiyevich went on in a happy frame of mind. He
      even started to run, without knowing why, after some lady, who flew past
      like a flash of lightning. But he stopped short, and went on very quietly
      as before, wondering why he had quickened his pace. Soon there spread
      before him these deserted streets which are not cheerful in the daytime,
      to say no thing of the evening. Now they were even more dim and lonely.
      The lanterns began to grow rarer, oil, evidently, had been less liberally
      supplied. Then came wooden houses and fences. Not a soul anywhere; only
      the snow sparkled in the streets, and mournfully veiled the low-roofed
      cabins with their closed shutters. He approached the spot where the street
      crossed a vast square with houses barely visible on its farther side, a
      square which seemed a fearful desert.
    

      Afar, a tiny spark glimmered from some watchman’s-box, which seemed
      to stand on the edge of the world. Akaky Akakiyevich’s cheerfulness
      diminished at this point in a marked degree. He entered the square, not
      without an involuntary sensation of fear, as though his heart warned him
      of some evil. He glanced back, and on both sides it was like a sea about
      him. “No, it is better not to look,” he thought, and went on,
      closing his eyes. When he opened them, to see whether he was near the end
      of the square, he suddenly beheld, standing just before his very nose,
      some bearded individuals of precisely what sort, he could not make out.
      All grew dark before his eyes, and his heart throbbed.
    

      “Of course, the cloak is mine!” said one of them in a loud
      voice, seizing hold of his collar. Akaky Akakiyevich was about to shout
      “Help!” when the second man thrust a fist, about the size of
      an official’s head, at his very mouth, muttering, “Just you
      dare to scream!”
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich felt them strip off his cloak, and give him a kick. He
      fell headlong upon the snow, and felt no more.
    

      In a few minutes he recovered consciousness, and rose to his feet, but no
      one was there. He felt that it was cold in the square, and that his cloak
      was gone. He began to shout, but his voice did not appear to reach the
      outskirts of the square. In despair, but without ceasing to shout, he
      started at a run across the square, straight towards the watch-box, beside
      which stood the watchman, leaning on his halberd, and apparently curious
      to know what kind of a customer was running towards him shouting. Akaky
      Akakiyevich ran up to him, and began in a sobbing voice to shout that he
      was asleep, and attended to nothing, and did not see when a man was
      robbed. The watchman replied that he had seen two men stop him in the
      middle of the square, but supposed that they were friends of his, and
      that, instead of scolding vainly, he had better go to the police on the
      morrow, so that they might make a search for whoever had stolen the cloak.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich ran home and arrived in a state of complete disorder,
      his hair which grew very thinly upon his temples and the back of his head
      all tousled, his body, arms and legs, covered with snow. The old woman,
      who was mistress of his lodgings, on hearing a terrible knocking, sprang
      hastily from her bed, and, with only one shoe on, ran to open the door,
      pressing the sleeve of her chemise to her bosom out of modesty. But when
      she had opened it, she fell back on beholding Akaky Akakiyevich in such a
      condition. When he told her about the affair, she clasped her hands, and
      said that he must go straight to the district chief of police, for his
      subordinate would turn up his nose, promise well, and drop the matter
      there. The very best thing to do, therefore, would be to go to the
      district chief, whom she knew, because Finnish Anna, her former cook, was
      now nurse at his house. She often saw him passing the house, and he was at
      church every Sunday, praying, but at the same time gazing cheerfully at
      everybody; so that he must be a good man, judging from all appearances.
      Having listened to this opinion, Akaky Akakiyevich betook himself sadly to
      his room. And how he spent the night there, any one who can put himself in
      another’s place may readily imagine.
    

      Early in the morning, he presented himself at the district chief’s,
      but was told the official was asleep. He went again at ten and was again
      informed that he was asleep. At eleven, and they said, “The
      superintendent is not at home.” At dinner time, and the clerks in
      the ante-room would not admit him on any terms, and insisted upon knowing
      his business. So that at last, for once in his life, Akaky Akakiyevich
      felt an inclination to show some spirit, and said curtly that he must see
      the chief in person, that they ought not to presume to refuse him
      entrance, that he came from the department of justice, and that when he
      complained of them, they would see.
    

      The clerks dared make no reply to this, and one of them went to call the
      chief, who listened to the strange story of the theft of the coat. Instead
      of directing his attention to the principal points of the matter, he began
      to question Akaky Akakiyevich. Why was he going home so late? Was he in
      the habit of doing so, or had he been to some disorderly house? So that
      Akaky Akakiyevich got thoroughly confused, and left him, without knowing
      whether the affair of his cloak was in proper train or not.
    

      All that day, for the first time in his life, he never went near the
      department. The next day he made his appearance, very pale, and in his old
      cape, which had become even more shabby. The news of the robbery of the
      cloak touched many, although there were some officials present who never
      lost an opportunity, even such a one as the present, of ridiculing Akaky
      Akakiyevich. They decided to make a collection for him on the spot, but
      the officials had already spent a great deal in subscribing for the
      director’s portrait, and for some book, at the suggestion of the
      head of that division, who was a friend of the author; and so the sum was
      trifling.
    

      One of them, moved by pity, resolved to help Akaky Akakiyevich with some
      good advice, at least, and told him that he ought not to go to the police,
      for although it might happen that a police-officer, wishing to win the
      approval of his superiors, might hunt up the cloak by some means, still,
      his cloak would remain in the possession of the police if he did not offer
      legal proof that it belonged to him. The best thing for him, therefore,
      would be to apply to a certain prominent personage; since this prominent
      personage, by entering into relation with the proper persons, could
      greatly expedite the matter.
    

      As there was nothing else to be done, Akaky Akakiyevich decided to go to
      the prominent personage. What was the exact official position of the
      prominent personage, remains unknown to this day. The reader must know
      that the prominent personage had but recently become a prominent
      personage, having up to that time been only an insignificant person.
      Moreover, his present position was not considered prominent in comparison
      with others still more so. But there is always a circle of people to whom
      what is insignificant in the eyes of others, is important enough.
      Moreover, he strove to increase his importance by sundry devices. For
      instance, he managed to have the inferior officials meet him on the
      staircase when he entered upon his service; no one was to presume to come
      directly to him, but the strictest etiquette must be observed; the
      collegiate recorder must make a report to the government secretary, the
      government secretary to the titular councillor, or whatever other man was
      proper, and all business must come before him in this manner. In Holy
      Russia, all is thus contaminated with the love of imitation; every man
      imitates and copies his superior. They even say that a certain titular
      councillor, when promoted to the head of some small separate office,
      immediately partitioned off a private room for himself, called it the
      audience chamber, and posted at the door a lackey with red collar and
      braid, who grasped the handle of the door, and opened to all comers,
      though the audience chamber would hardly hold an ordinary writing table.
    

      The manners and customs of the prominent personage were grand and
      imposing, but rather exaggerated. The main foundation of his system was
      strictness. “Strictness, strictness, and always strictness!”
      he generally said; and at the last word he looked significantly into the
      face of the person to whom he spoke. But there was no necessity for this,
      for the halfscore of subordinates, who formed the entire force of the
      office, were properly afraid. On catching sight of him afar off, they left
      their work, and waited, drawn up in line, until he had passed through the
      room. His ordinary converse with his inferiors smacked of sternness, and
      consisted chiefly of three phrases: “How dare you?” “Do
      you know whom you are speaking to?” “Do you realise who is
      standing before you?”
    

      Otherwise he was a very kind-hearted man, good to his comrades, and ready
      to oblige. But the rank of general threw him completely off his balance.
      On receiving any one of that rank, he became confused, lost his way, as it
      were, and never knew what to do. If he chanced to be amongst his equals,
      he was still a very nice kind of man, a very good fellow in many respects,
      and not stupid, but the very moment that he found himself in the society
      of people but one rank lower than himself, he became silent. And his
      situation aroused sympathy, the more so, as he felt himself that he might
      have been making an incomparably better use of his time. In his eyes,
      there was sometimes visible a desire to join some interesting conversation
      or group, but he was kept back by the thought, “Would it not be a
      very great condescension on his part? Would it not be familiar? And would
      he not thereby lose his importance?” And in consequence of such
      reflections, he always remained in the same dumb state, uttering from time
      to time a few monosyllabic sounds, and thereby earning the name of the
      most wearisome of men.
    

      To this prominent personage Akaky Akakiyevich presented himself, and this
      at the most unfavourable time for himself, though opportune for the
      prominent personage. The prominent personage was in his cabinet,
      conversing very gaily with an old acquaintance and companion of his
      childhood, whom he had not seen for several years, and who had just
      arrived, when it was announced to him that a person named Bashmachkin had
      come. He asked abruptly, “Who is he?”—“Some
      official,” he was informed. “Ah, he can wait! This is no time
      for him to call,” said the important man.
    

      It must be remarked here that the important man lied outrageously. He had
      said all he had to say to his friend long before, and the conversation had
      been interspersed for some time with very long pauses, during which they
      merely slapped each other on the leg, and said, “You think so, Ivan
      Abramovich!” “Just so, Stepan Varlamovich!”
      Nevertheless, he ordered that the official should be kept waiting, in
      order to show his friend, a man who had not been in the service for a long
      time, but had lived at home in the country, how long officials had to wait
      in his ante-room.
    

      At length, having talked himself completely out, and more than that,
      having had his fill of pauses, and smoked a cigar in a very comfortable
      arm-chair with reclining back, he suddenly seemed to recollect, and said
      to the secretary, who stood by the door with papers of reports, “So
      it seems that there is an official waiting to see me. Tell him that he may
      come in.” On perceiving Akaky Akakiyevich’s modest mien and
      his worn uniform, he turned abruptly to him, and said, “What do you
      want?” in a curt hard voice, which he had practised in his room in
      private, and before the looking-glass, for a whole week before being
      raised to his present rank.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich, who was already imbued with a due amount of fear,
      became somewhat confused, and as well as his tongue would permit,
      explained, with a rather more frequent addition than usual of the word
      “that” that his cloak was quite new, and had been stolen in
      the most inhuman manner; that he had applied to him, in order that he
      might, in some way, by his intermediation—that he might enter into
      correspondence with the chief of police, and find the cloak.
    

      For some inexplicable reason, this conduct seemed familiar to the
      prominent personage.
    

      “What, my dear sir!” he said abruptly, “are you not
      acquainted with etiquette? To whom have you come? Don’t you know how
      such matters are managed? You should first have presented a petition to
      the office. It would have gone to the head of the department, then to the
      chief of the division, then it would have been handed over to the
      secretary, and the secretary would have given it to me.”
    

      “But, your excellency,” said Akaky Akakiyevich, trying to
      collect his small handful of wits, and conscious at the same time that he
      was perspiring terribly, “I, your excellency, presumed to trouble
      you because secretaries—are an untrustworthy race.”
    

      “What, what, what!” said the important personage. “Where
      did you get such courage? Where did you get such ideas? What impudence
      towards their chiefs and superiors has spread among the young generation!”
      The prominent personage apparently had not observed that Akaky Akakiyevich
      was already in the neighbourhood of fifty. If he could be called a young
      man, it must have been in comparison with some one who was seventy.
      “Do you know to whom you are speaking? Do you realise who is
      standing before you? Do you realise it? Do you realise it, I ask you!”
      Then he stamped his foot, and raised his voice to such a pitch that it
      would have frightened even a different man from Akaky Akakiyevich.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich’s senses failed him. He staggered, trembled in
      every limb, and, if the porters had not run in to support him, would have
      fallen to the floor. They carried him out insensible. But the prominent
      personage, gratified that the effect should have surpassed his
      expectations, and quite intoxicated with the thought that his word could
      even deprive a man of his senses, glanced sideways at his friend in order
      to see how he looked upon this, and perceived, not without satisfaction,
      that his friend was in a most uneasy frame of mind, and even beginning on
      his part, to feel a trifle frightened.
    

      Akaky Akakiyevich could not remember how he descended the stairs, and got
      into the street. He felt neither his hands nor feet. Never in his life had
      he been so rated by any high official, let alone a strange one. He went
      staggering on through the snow-storm, which was blowing in the streets,
      with his mouth wide open. The wind, in St. Petersburg fashion, darted upon
      him from all quarters, and down every cross-street. In a twinkling it had
      blown a quinsy into his throat, and he reached home unable to utter a
      word. His throat was swollen, and he lay down on his bed. So powerful is
      sometimes a good scolding!
    

      The next day a violent fever developed. Thanks to the generous assistance
      of the St. Petersburg climate, the malady progressed more rapidly than
      could have been expected, and when the doctor arrived, he found, on
      feeling the sick man’s pulse, that there was nothing to be done,
      except to prescribe a poultice, so that the patient might not be left
      entirely without the beneficent aid of medicine. But at the same time, he
      predicted his end in thirty-six hours. After this he turned to the
      landlady, and said, “And as for you, don’t waste your time on
      him. Order his pine coffin now, for an oak one will be too expensive for
      him.”
    

      Did Akaky Akakiyevich hear these fatal words? And if he heard them, did
      they produce any overwhelming effect upon him? Did he lament the
      bitterness of his life?—We know not, for he continued in a delirious
      condition. Visions incessantly appeared to him, each stranger than the
      other. Now he saw Petrovich, and ordered him to make a cloak, with some
      traps for robbers, who seemed to him to be always under the bed; and he
      cried every moment to the landlady to pull one of them from under his
      coverlet. Then he inquired why his old mantle hung before him when he had
      a new cloak. Next he fancied that he was standing before the prominent
      person, listening to a thorough setting-down and saying, “Forgive
      me, your excellency!” but at last he began to curse, uttering the
      most horrible words, so that his aged landlady crossed herself, never in
      her life having heard anything of the kind from him, and more so as these
      words followed directly after the words “your excellency.”
      Later on he talked utter nonsense, of which nothing could be made, all
      that was evident being that these incoherent words and thoughts hovered
      ever about one thing, his cloak.
    

      At length poor Akaky Akakiyevich breathed his last. They sealed up neither
      his room nor his effects, because, in the first place, there were no
      heirs, and, in the second, there was very little to inherit beyond a
      bundle of goose-quills, a quire of white official paper, three pairs of
      socks, two or three buttons which had burst off his trousers, and the
      mantle already known to the reader. To whom all this fell, God knows. I
      confess that the person who told me this tale took no interest in the
      matter. They carried Akaky Akakiyevich out, and buried him.
    

      And St. Petersburg was left without Akaky Akakiyevich, as though he had
      never lived there. A being disappeared, who was protected by none, dear to
      none, interesting to none, and who never even attracted to himself the
      attention of those students of human nature who omit no opportunity of
      thrusting a pin through a common fly and examining it under the
      microscope. A being who bore meekly the jibes of the department, and went
      to his grave without having done one unusual deed, but to whom,
      nevertheless, at the close of his life, appeared a bright visitant in the
      form of a cloak, which momentarily cheered his poor life, and upon him,
      thereafter, an intolerable misfortune descended, just as it descends upon
      the heads of the mighty of this world!
    

      Several days after his death, the porter was sent from the department to
      his lodgings, with an order for him to present himself there immediately,
      the chief commanding it. But the porter had to return unsuccessful, with
      the answer that he could not come; and to the question, “Why?”
      replied, “Well, because he is dead! he was buried four days ago.”
      In this manner did they hear of Akaky Akakiyevich’s death at the
      department. And the next day a new official sat in his place, with a
      handwriting by no means so upright, but more inclined and slanting.
    

      But who could have imagined that this was not really the end of Akaky
      Akakiyevich, that he was destined to raise a commotion after death, as if
      in compensation for his utterly insignificant life? But so it happened,
      and our poor story unexpectedly gains a fantastic ending.
    

      A rumour suddenly spread through St. Petersburg, that a dead man had taken
      to appearing on the KaFlinkin Bridge, and its vicinity, at night in the
      form of an official seeking a stolen cloak, and that, under the pretext of
      its being the stolen cloak, he dragged, without regard to rank or calling,
      every one’s cloak from his shoulders, be it cat-skin, beaver, fox,
      bear, sable, in a word, every sort of fur and skin which men adopted for
      their covering. One of the department officials saw the dead man with his
      own eyes, and immediately recognised in him Akaky Akakiyevich. This,
      however, inspired him with such terror, that he ran off with all his
      might, and therefore did not scan the dead man closely, but only saw how
      the latter threatened him from afar with his finger. Constant complaints
      poured in from all quarters, that the backs and shoulders, not only of
      titular but even of court councillors, were exposed to the danger of a
      cold, on account of the frequent dragging off of their cloaks.
    

      Arrangements were made by the police to catch the corpse, alive or dead,
      at any cost, and punish him as an example to others, in the most severe
      manner. In this they nearly succeeded, for a watchman, on guard in
      Kirinshkin Lane, caught the corpse by the collar on the very scene of his
      evil deeds, when attempting to pull off the frieze cloak of a retired
      musician. Having seized him by the collar, he summoned, with a shout, two
      of his comrades, whom he enjoined to hold him fast, while he himself felt
      for a moment in his boot, in order to draw out his snuff-box, and refresh
      his frozen nose. But the snuff was of a sort which even a corpse could not
      endure. The watchman having closed his right nostril with his finger, had
      no sooner succeeded in holding half a handful up to the left, than the
      corpse sneezed so violently that he completely filled the eyes of all
      three. While they raised their hands to wipe them, the dead man vanished
      completely, so that they positively did not know whether they had actually
      had him in their grip at all. Thereafter the watchmen conceived such a
      terror of dead men that they were afraid even to seize the living, and
      only screamed from a distance. “Hey, there! go your way!” So
      the dead official began to appear even beyond the KaFlinkin Bridge,
      causing no little terror to all timid people.
    

      But we have totally neglected that certain prominent personage who may
      really be considered as the cause of the fantastic turn taken by this true
      history. First of all, justice compels us to say, that after the departure
      of poor, annihilated Akaky Akakiyevich, he felt something like remorse.
      Suffering was unpleasant to him, for his heart was accessible to many good
      impulses, in spite of the fact that his rank often prevented his showing
      his true self. As soon as his friend had left his cabinet, he began to
      think about poor Akaky Akakiyevich. And from that day forth, poor Akaky
      Akakiyevich, who could not bear up under an official reprimand, recurred
      to his mind almost every day. The thought troubled him to such an extent,
      that a week later he even resolved to send an official to him, to learn
      whether he really could assist him. And when it was reported to him that
      Akaky Akakiyevich had died suddenly of fever, he was startled, hearkened
      to the reproaches of his conscience, and was out of sorts for the whole
      day.
    

      Wishing to divert his mind in some way and drive away the disagreeable
      impression, he set out that evening for one of his friends’ houses,
      where he found quite a large party assembled. What was better, nearly
      every one was of the same rank as himself, so that he need not feel in the
      least constrained. This had a marvellous effect upon his mental state. He
      grew expansive, made himself agreeable in conversation, in short, he
      passed a delightful evening. After supper he drank a couple of glasses of
      champagne—not a bad recipe for cheerfulness, as every one knows. The
      champagne inclined him to various adventures, and he determined not to
      return home, but to go and see a certain well-known lady, of German
      extraction, Karolina Ivanovna, a lady, it appears, with whom he was on a
      very friendly footing.
    

      It must be mentioned that the prominent personage was no longer a young
      man, but a good husband and respected father of a family. Two sons, one of
      whom was already in the service, and a good-looking, sixteen-year-old
      daughter, with a slightly arched but pretty little nose, came every
      morning to kiss his hand and say, “Bon jour, papa.” His
      wife, a still fresh and good-looking woman, first gave him her hand to
      kiss, and then, reversing the procedure, kissed his. But the prominent
      personage, though perfectly satisfied in his domestic relations,
      considered it stylish to have a friend in another quarter of the city.
      This friend was scarcely prettier or younger than his wife; but there are
      such puzzles in the world, and it is not our place to judge them. So the
      important personage descended the stairs, stepped into his sledge, said to
      the coachman, “To Karolina Ivanovna’s,” and, wrapping
      himself luxuriously in his warm cloak, found himself in that delightful
      frame of mind than which a Russian can conceive nothing better, namely,
      when you think of nothing yourself, yet when the thoughts creep into your
      mind of their own accord, each more agreeable than the other, giving you
      no trouble either to drive them away, or seek them. Fully satisfied, he
      recalled all the gay features of the evening just passed and all the mots
      which had made the little circle laugh. Many of them he repeated in a low
      voice, and found them quite as funny as before; so it is not surprising
      that he should laugh heartily at them. Occasionally, however, he was
      interrupted by gusts of wind, which, coming suddenly, God knows whence or
      why, cut his face, drove masses of snow into it, filled out his
      cloak-collar like a sail, or suddenly blew it over his head with
      supernatural force, and thus caused him constant trouble to disentangle
      himself.
    

      Suddenly the important personage felt some one clutch him firmly by the
      collar. Turning round, he perceived a man of short stature, in an old,
      worn uniform, and recognised, not without terror, Akaky Akakiyevich. The
      official’s face was white as snow, and looked just like a corpse’s.
      But the horror of the important personage transcended all bounds when he
      saw the dead man’s mouth open, and heard it utter the following
      remarks, while it breathed upon him the terrible odour of the grave:
      “Ah, here you are at last! I have you, that—by the collar! I
      need your cloak. You took no trouble about mine, but reprimanded me. So
      now give up your own.”
    

      The pallid prominent personage almost died of fright. Brave as he was in
      the office and in the presence of inferiors generally, and although, at
      the sight of his manly form and appearance, every one said, “Ugh!
      how much character he has!” at this crisis, he, like many possessed
      of an heroic exterior, experienced such terror, that, not without cause,
      he began to fear an attack of illness. He flung his cloak hastily from his
      shoulders and shouted to his coachman in an unnatural voice, “Home
      at full speed!” The coachman, hearing the tone which is generally
      employed at critical moments, and even accompanied by something much more
      tangible, drew his head down between his shoulders in case of an
      emergency, flourished his whip, and flew on like an arrow. In a little
      more than six minutes the prominent personage was at the entrance of his
      own house. Pale, thoroughly scared, and cloakless, he went home instead of
      to Karolina Ivanovna’s, reached his room somehow or other, and
      passed the night in the direst distress; so that the next morning over
      their tea, his daughter said, “You are very pale to-day, papa.”
      But papa remained silent, and said not a word to any one of what had
      happened to him, where he had been, or where he had intended to go.
    

      This occurrence made a deep impression upon him. He even began to say,
      “How dare you? Do you realise who is standing before you?”
      less frequently to the under-officials, and, if he did utter the words, it
      was only after first having learned the bearings of the matter. But the
      most noteworthy point was, that from that day forward the apparition of
      the dead official ceased to be seen. Evidently the prominent personage’s
      cloak just fitted his shoulders. At all events, no more instances of his
      dragging cloaks from people’s shoulders were heard of. But many
      active and solicitous persons could by no means reassure themselves, and
      asserted that the dead official still showed himself in distant parts of
      the city.
    

      In fact, one watchman in Kolomen saw with his own eyes the apparition come
      from behind a house. But the watchman was not a strong man, so he was
      afraid to arrest him, and followed him in the dark, until, at length, the
      apparition looked round, paused, and inquired, “What do you want?”
      at the same time showing such a fist as is never seen on living men. The
      watchman said, “Nothing,” and turned back instantly. But the
      apparition was much too tall, wore huge moustaches, and, directing its
      steps apparently towards the Obukhov Bridge, disappeared in the darkness
      of the night.
    











      THE DISTRICT DOCTOR
    

      BY IVAN S. TURGENEV
    

One day in autumn
      on my way back from a remote part of the country I caught cold and fell
      ill. Fortunately the fever attacked me in the district town at the inn; I
      sent for the doctor. In half-an-hour the district doctor appeared, a thin,
      dark-haired man of middle height. He prescribed me the usual sudorific,
      ordered a mustard-plaster to be put on, very deftly slid a five-ruble note
      up his sleeve, coughing drily and looking away as he did so, and then was
      getting up to go home, but somehow fell into talk and remained. I was
      exhausted with feverishness; I foresaw a sleepless night, and was glad of
      a little chat with a pleasant companion. Tea was served. My doctor began
      to converse freely. He was a sensible fellow, and expressed himself with
      vigour and some humour. Queer things happen in the world: you may live a
      long while with some people, and be on friendly terms with them, and never
      once speak openly with them from your soul; with others you have scarcely
      time to get acquainted, and all at once you are pouring out to him—or
      he to you—all your secrets, as though you were at confession. I don’t
      know how I gained the confidence of my new friend—anyway, with
      nothing to lead up to it, he told me a rather curious incident; and here I
      will report his tale for the information of the indulgent reader. I will
      try to tell it in the doctor’s own words.
    

      “You don’t happen to know,” he began in a weak and
      quavering voice (the common result of the use of unmixed Berezov snuff);
      “you don’t happen to know the judge here, Mylov, Pavel
      Lukich?... You don’t know him?... Well, it’s all the same.”
      (He cleared his throat and rubbed his eyes.) “Well, you see, the
      thing happened, to tell you exactly without mistake, in Lent, at the very
      time of the thaws. I was sitting at his house—our judge’s, you
      know—playing preference. Our judge is a good fellow, and fond of
      playing preference. Suddenly” (the doctor made frequent use of this
      word, suddenly) “they tell me, ‘There’s a servant asking
      for you.’ I say, ‘What does he want?’ They say, He has
      brought a note—it must be from a patient.’ ‘Give me the
      note,’ I say. So it is from a patient—well and good—you
      understand—it’s our bread and butter... But this is how it
      was: a lady, a widow, writes to me; she says, ‘My daughter is dying.
      Come, for God’s sake!’ she says, ‘and the horses have
      been sent for you.’... Well, that’s all right. But she was
      twenty miles from the town, and it was midnight out of doors, and the
      roads in such a state, my word! And as she was poor herself, one could not
      expect more than two silver rubles, and even that problematic; and perhaps
      it might only be a matter of a roll of linen and a sack of oatmeal in payment.
      However, duty, you know, before everything: a fellow-creature may be
      dying. I hand over my cards at once to Kalliopin, the member of the
      provincial commission, and return home. I look; a wretched little trap was
      standing at the steps, with peasant’s horses, fat—too fat—and
      their coat as shaggy as felt; and the coachman sitting with his cap off
      out of respect. Well, I think to myself, ‘It’s clear, my
      friend, these patients aren’t rolling in riches.’... You
      smile; but I tell you, a poor man like me has to take everything into
      consideration... If the coachman sits like a prince, and doesn’t
      touch his cap, and even sneers at you behind his beard, and flicks his
      whip—then you may bet on six rubles. But this case, I saw, had a
      very different air. However, I think there’s no help for it; duty
      before everything. I snatch up the most necessary drugs, and set off. Will
      you believe it? I only just managed to get there at all. The road was
      infernal: streams, snow, watercourses, and the dyke had suddenly burst
      there—that was the worst of it! However, I arrived at last. It was a
      little thatched house. There was a light in the windows; that meant they
      expected me. I was met by an old lady, very venerable, in a cap. ‘Save
      her!’ she says; ‘she is dying.’ I say, 'Pray don’t
      distress yourself—Where is the invalid?’ ‘Come this way.’
      I see a clean little room, a lamp in the corner; on the bed a girl of
      twenty, unconscious. She was in a burning heat, and breathing heavily—it
      was fever. There were two other girls, her sisters, scared and in tears.
      ‘Yesterday,’ they tell me, ‘she was perfectly well and
      had a good appetite; this morning she complained of her head, and this
      evening, suddenly, you see, like this.’ I say again: ‘Pray don’t
      be uneasy.’ It’s a doctor’s duty, you know—and I
      went up to her and bled her, told them to put on a mustard-plaster, and
      prescribed a mixture. Meantime I looked at her; I looked at her, you know—there,
      by God! I had never seen such a face!—she was a beauty, in a word! I
      felt quite shaken with pity. Such lovely features; such eyes!... But,
      thank God! she became easier; she fell into a perspiration, seemed to come
      to her senses, looked round, smiled, and passed her hand over her face...
      Her sisters bent over her. They ask, ‘How are you?’ ‘All
      right,’ she says, and turns away. I looked at her; she had fallen
      asleep. ‘Well,’ I say, 'now the patient should be left alone.’
      So we all went out on tiptoe; only a maid remained, in case she was
      wanted. In the parlour there was a samovar standing on the table, and a
      bottle of rum; in our profession one can’t get on without it. They
      gave me tea; asked me to stop the night... I consented: where could I go,
      indeed, at that time of night? The old lady kept groaning. ‘What is
      it?’ I say; ‘she will live; don’t worry yourself; you
      had better take a little rest yourself; it is about two o’clock.’
      ‘But will you send to wake me if anything happens?’ ‘Yes,
      yes.’ The old lady went away, and the girls too went to their own
      room; they made up a bed for me in the parlour. Well, I went to bed—but
      I could not get to sleep, for a wonder! for in reality I was very tired. I
      could not get my patient out of my head. At last I could not put up with
      it any longer; I got up suddenly; I think to myself, ‘I will go and
      see how the patient is getting on.’ Her bedroom was next to the
      parlour. Well, I got up, and gently opened the door—how my heart
      beat! I looked in: the servant was asleep, her mouth wide open, and even
      snoring, the wretch! but the patient lay with her face towards me and her
      arms flung wide apart, poor girl! I went up to her ... when suddenly she
      opened her eyes and stared at me! ‘Who is it? who is it?’ I
      was in confusion. ‘Don’t be alarmed, madam,’ I say;
      ‘I am the doctor; I have come to see how you feel.’ ‘You
      the doctor?’ ‘Yes, the doctor; your mother sent for me from
      the town; we have bled you, madam; now pray go to sleep, and in a day or
      two, please God! we will set you on your feet again.’ ‘Ah,
      yes, yes, doctor, don’t let me die... please, please.’ ‘Why
      do you talk like that? God bless you!’ She is in a fever again, I
      think to myself; I felt her pulse; yes, she was feverish. She looked at
      me, and then took me by the hand. ‘I will tell you why I don’t
      want to die: I will tell you... Now we are alone; and only, please don’t
      you ... not to any one ... Listen...’ I bent down; she moved her
      lips quite to my ear; she touched my cheek with her hair—I confess
      my head went round—and began to whisper... I could make out nothing
      of it... Ah, she was delirious! ... She whispered and whispered, but so
      quickly, and as if it were not in Russian; at last she finished, and
      shivering dropped her head on the pillow, and threatened me with her
      finger: 'Remember, doctor, to no one.’ I calmed her somehow, gave
      her something to drink, waked the servant, and went away.”
    

      At this point the doctor again took snuff with exasperated energy, and for
      a moment seemed stupefied by its effects.
    

      “However,” he continued, “the next day, contrary to my
      expectations, the patient was no better. I thought and thought, and
      suddenly decided to remain there, even though my other patients were
      expecting me... And you know one can’t afford to disregard that; one’s
      practice suffers if one does. But, in the first place, the patient was
      really in danger; and secondly, to tell the truth, I felt strongly drawn
      to her. Besides, I liked the whole family. Though they were really badly
      off, they were singularly, I may say, cultivated people... Their father
      had been a learned man, an author; he died, of course, in poverty, but he
      had managed before he died to give his children an excellent education; he
      left a lot of books too. Either because I looked after the invalid very
      carefully, or for some other reason; anyway, I can venture to say all the
      household loved me as if I were one of the family... Meantime the roads
      were in a worse state than ever; all communications, so to say, were cut
      off completely; even medicine could with difficulty be got from the
      town... The sick girl was not getting better... Day after day, and day
      after day ... but ... here...” (The doctor made a brief pause.)
      “I declare I don’t know how to tell you.”... (He again
      took snuff, coughed, and swallowed a little tea.) “I will tell you
      without beating about the bush. My patient ... how should I say?... Well
      she had fallen in love with me ... or, no, it was not that she was in love
      ... however ... really, how should one say?” (The doctor looked down
      and grew red.) “No,” he went on quickly, “in love,
      indeed! A man should not over-estimate himself. She was an educated girl,
      clever and well-read, and I had even forgotten my Latin, one may say,
      completely. As to appearance” (the doctor looked himself over with a
      smile) “I am nothing to boast of there either. But God Almighty did
      not make me a fool; I don’t take black for white; I know a thing or
      two; I could see very clearly, for instance that Aleksandra Andreyevna—that
      was her name—did not feel love for me, but had a friendly, so to
      say, inclination—a respect or something for me. Though she herself
      perhaps mistook this sentiment, anyway this was her attitude; you may form
      your own judgment of it. But,” added the doctor, who had brought out
      all these disconnected sentences without taking breath, and with obvious
      embarrassment, “I seem to be wandering rather—you won’t
      understand anything like this ... There, with your leave, I will relate it
      all in order.”
    

      He drank off a glass of tea, and began in a calmer voice.
    

      “Well, then. My patient kept getting worse and worse. You are not a
      doctor, my good sir; you cannot understand what passes in a poor fellow’s
      heart, especially at first, when he begins to suspect that the disease is
      getting the upper hand of him. What becomes of his belief in himself? You
      suddenly grow so timid; it’s indescribable. You fancy then that you
      have forgotten everything you knew, and that the patient has no faith in
      you, and that other people begin to notice how distracted you are, and
      tell you the symptoms with reluctance; that they are looking at you
      suspiciously, whispering... Ah! it’s horrid! There must be a remedy,
      you think, for this disease, if one could find it. Isn’t this it?
      You try—no, that’s not it! You don’t allow the medicine
      the necessary time to do good... You clutch at one thing, then at another.
      Sometimes you take up a book of medical prescriptions—here it is,
      you think! Sometimes, by Jove, you pick one out by chance, thinking to
      leave it to fate... But meantime a fellow-creature’s dying, and
      another doctor would have saved him. ‘We must have a consultation,’
      you say; ‘I will not take the responsibility on myself.’ And
      what a fool you look at such times! Well, in time you learn to bear it; it’s
      nothing to you. A man has died—but it’s not your fault; you
      treated him by the rules. But what’s still more torture to you is to
      see blind faith in you, and to feel yourself that you are not able to be
      of use. Well, it was just this blind faith that the whole of Aleksandra
      Andreyevna’s family had in me; they had forgotten to think that
      their daughter was in danger. I, too, on my side assure them that it’s
      nothing, but meantime my heart sinks into my boots. To add to our
      troubles, the roads were in such a state that the coachman was gone for
      whole days together to get medicine. And I never left the patient’s
      room; I could not tear myself away; I tell her amusing stories, you know,
      and play cards with her. I watch by her side at night. The old mother
      thanks me with tears in her eyes; but I think to myself, ‘I don’t
      deserve your gratitude.’ I frankly confess to you—there is no
      object in concealing it now—I was in love with my patient. And
      Aleksandra Andreyevna had grown fond of me; she would not sometimes let
      any one be in her room but me. She began to talk to me, to ask me
      questions; where I had studied, how I lived, who are my people, whom I go
      to see. I feel that she ought not to talk; but to forbid her to—to
      forbid her resolutely, you know—I could not. Sometimes I held my
      head in my hands, and asked myself, “What are you doing, villain?”...
      And she would take my hand and hold it, give me a long, long look, and
      turn away, sigh, and say, ‘How good you are!’ Her hands were
      so feverish, her eyes so large and languid... 'Yes,’ she says,
      ‘you are a good, kind man; you are not like our neighbours... No,
      you are not like that... Why did I not know you till now!’ ‘Aleksandra
      Andreyevna, calm yourself,’ I say... ‘I feel, believe me, I
      don’t know how I have gained ... but there, calm yourself... All
      will be right; you will be well again.’ And meanwhile I must tell
      you,” continued the doctor, bending forward and raising his
      eyebrows, “that they associated very little with the neighbours,
      because the smaller people were not on their level, and pride hindered
      them from being friendly with the rich. I tell you, they were an
      exceptionally cultivated family; so you know it was gratifying for me. She
      would only take her medicine from my hands ... she would lift herself up,
      poor girl, with my aid, take it, and gaze at me... My heart felt as if it
      were bursting. And meanwhile she was growing worse and worse, worse and
      worse, all the time; she will die, I think to myself; she must die.
      Believe me, I would sooner have gone to the grave myself; and here were
      her mother and sisters watching me, looking into my eyes ... and their
      faith in me was wearing away. 'Well? how is she?’ ‘Oh, all
      right, all right!’ All right, indeed! My mind was failing me. Well,
      I was sitting one night alone again by my patient. The maid was sitting
      there too, and snoring away in full swing; I can’t find fault with
      the poor girl, though; she was worn out too. Aleksandra Andreyevna had
      felt very unwell all the evening; she was very feverish. Until midnight
      she kept tossing about; at last she seemed to fall asleep; at least, she
      lay still without stirring. The lamp was burning in the corner before the
      holy image. I sat there, you know, with my head bent; I even dozed a
      little. Suddenly it seemed as though some one touched me in the side; I
      turned round... Good God! Aleksandra Andreyevna was gazing with intent
      eyes at me ... her lips parted, her cheeks seemed burning. ‘What is
      it?’ ‘Doctor, shall I die?’ ‘Merciful Heavens!’
      ‘No, doctor, no; please don’t tell me I shall live ... don’t
      say so... If you knew... Listen! for God’s sake don’t conceal
      my real position,’ and her breath came so fast. ‘If I can know
      for certain that I must die ... then I will tell you all— all!’
      ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna, I beg!’ ‘Listen; I have not been
      asleep at all ... I have been looking at you a long while... For God’s
      sake!... I believe in you; you are a good man, an honest man; I entreat
      you by all that is sacred in the world—tell me the truth! If you
      knew how important it is for me... Doctor, for God’s sake tell me...
      Am I in danger?’ ‘What can I tell you, Aleksandra Andreyevna,
      pray?’ ‘For God’s sake, I beseech you!’ ‘I
      can’t disguise from you,’ I say, ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna;
      you are certainly in danger; but God is merciful.’ ‘I shall
      die, I shall die.’ And it seemed as though she were pleased; her
      face grew so bright; I was alarmed. ‘Don’t be afraid, don’t
      be afraid! I am not frightened of death at all.’ She suddenly sat up
      and leaned on her elbow. ‘Now ... yes, now I can tell you that I
      thank you with my whole heart ... that you are kind and good—that I
      love you!’ I stare at her, like one possessed; it was terrible for
      me, you know. ‘Do you hear, I love you!’ ‘Aleksandra
      Andreyevna, how have I deserved—’ ‘No, no, you don’t—you
      don’t understand me.’... And suddenly she stretched out her
      arms, and taking my head in her hands, she kissed it... Believe me, I
      almost screamed aloud... I threw myself on my knees, and buried my head in
      the pillow. She did not speak; her fingers trembled in my hair; I listen;
      she is weeping. I began to soothe her, to assure her... I really don’t
      know what I did say to her. ‘You will wake up the girl,’ I say
      to her; 'Aleksandra Andreyevna, I thank you ... believe me ... calm
      yourself.’ 'Enough, enough!’ she persisted; ‘never mind
      all of them; let them wake, then; let them come in—it does not
      matter; I am dying, you see... And what do you fear? why are you afraid?
      Lift up your head... Or, perhaps, you don’t love me; perhaps I am
      wrong... In that case, forgive me.’ ‘Aleksandra Andreyevna,
      what are you saying!... I love you, Aleksandra Andreyevna.’ She
      looked straight into my eyes, and opened her arms wide. ‘Then take
      me in your arms.’ I tell you frankly, I don’t know how it was
      I did not go mad that night. I feel that my patient is killing herself; I
      see that she is not fully herself; I understand, too, that if she did not
      consider herself on the point of death, she would never have thought of
      me; and, indeed, say what you will, it’s hard to die at twenty
      without having known love; this was what was torturing her; this was why,
      in despair, she caught at me—do you understand now? But she held me
      in her arms, and would not let me go. ‘Have pity on me, Aleksandra
      Andreyevna, and have pity on yourself,’ I say. ‘Why,’
      she says; ‘what is there to think of? You know I must die.’
      ... This she repeated incessantly ... ‘If I knew that I should
      return to life, and be a proper young lady again, I should be ashamed ...
      of course, ashamed ... but why now?’ ‘But who has said you
      will die?’ ‘Oh, no, leave off! you will not deceive me; you
      don’t know how to lie—look at your face.’ ... ‘You
      shall live, Aleksandra Andreyevna; I will cure you; we will ask your
      mother’s blessing ... we will be united—we will be happy.’
      ‘No, no, I have your word; I must die ... you have promised me ...
      you have told me.’ ... It was cruel for me—cruel for many
      reasons. And see what trifling things can do sometimes; it seems nothing
      at all, but it’s painful. It occurred to her to ask me, what is my
      name; not my surname, but my first name. I must needs be so unlucky as to
      be called Trifon. Yes, indeed; Trifon Ivanich. Every one in the house
      called me doctor. However, there’s no help for it. I say, ‘Trifon,
      madam.’ She frowned, shook her head, and muttered something in
      French—ah, something unpleasant, of course!—and then she
      laughed—disagreeably too. Well, I spent the whole night with her in
      this way. Before morning I went away, feeling as though I were mad. When I
      went again into her room it was daytime, after morning tea. Good God! I
      could scarcely recognise her; people are laid in their grave looking
      better than that. I swear to you, on my honour, I don’t understand—I
      absolutely don’t understand—now, how I lived through that
      experience. Three days and nights my patient still lingered on. And what
      nights! What things she said to me! And on the last night—only
      imagine to yourself—I was sitting near her, and kept praying to God
      for one thing only: ‘Take her,’ I said, ‘quickly, and me
      with her.’ Suddenly the old mother comes unexpectedly into the room.
      I had already the evening before told her—-the mother—there
      was little hope, and it would be well to send for a priest. When the sick
      girl saw her mother she said: ‘It’s very well you have come;
      look at us, we love one another—we have given each other our word.’
      ‘What does she say, doctor? what does she say?’ I turned
      livid. ‘She is wandering,’ I say; ‘the fever.’
      But she: ‘Hush, hush; you told me something quite different just
      now, and have taken my ring. Why do you pretend? My mother is good—she
      will forgive—she will understand—and I am dying. ... I have no
      need to tell lies; give me your hand.’ I jumped up and ran out of
      the room. The old lady, of course, guessed how it was.
    

      “I will not, however, weary you any longer, and to me too, of
      course, it’s painful to recall all this. My patient passed away the
      next day. God rest her soul!” the doctor added, speaking quickly and
      with a sigh. “Before her death she asked her family to go out and
      leave me alone with her.”
    

      “‘Forgive me,’ she said; ‘I am perhaps to blame
      towards you ... my illness ... but believe me, I have loved no one more
      than you ... do not forget me ... keep my ring.’”
    

      The doctor turned away; I took his hand.
    

      “Ah!” he said, “let us talk of something else, or would
      you care to play preference for a small stake? It is not for people like
      me to give way to exalted emotions. There’s only one thing for me to
      think of; how to keep the children from crying and the wife from scolding.
      Since then, you know, I have had time to enter into lawful wedlock, as
      they say... Oh ... I took a merchant’s daughter—seven thousand
      for her dowry. Her name’s Akulina; it goes well with Trifon. She is
      an ill-tempered woman, I must tell you, but luckily she’s asleep all
      day... Well, shall it be preference?”
    

      We sat down to preference for halfpenny points. Trifon Ivanich won two
      rubles and a half from me, and went home late, well pleased with his
      success.
    











      THE CHRISTMAS TREE AND THE WEDDING
    

      BY FIODOR M. DOSTOYEVSKY
    

The other day I saw
      a wedding... But no! I would rather tell you about a Christmas tree. The
      wedding was superb. I liked it immensely. But the other incident was still
      finer. I don’t know why it is that the sight of the wedding reminded
      me of the Christmas tree. This is the way it happened:
    

      Exactly five years ago, on New Year’s Eve, I was invited to a
      children’s ball by a man high up in the business world, who had his
      connections, his circle of acquaintances, and his intrigues. So it seemed
      as though the children’s ball was merely a pretext for the parents
      to come together and discuss matters of interest to themselves, quite
      innocently and casually.
    

      I was an outsider, and, as I had no special matters to air, I was able to
      spend the evening independently of the others. There was another gentleman
      present who like myself had just stumbled upon this affair of domestic
      bliss. He was the first to attract my attention. His appearance was not
      that of a man of birth or high family. He was tall, rather thin, very
      serious, and well dressed. Apparently he had no heart for the family
      festivities. The instant he went off into a corner by himself the smile
      disappeared from his face, and his thick dark brows knitted into a frown.
      He knew no one except the host and showed every sign of being bored to
      death, though bravely sustaining the role of thorough enjoyment to the
      end. Later I learned that he was a provincial, had come to the capital on
      some important, brain-racking business, had brought a letter of
      recommendation to our host, and our host had taken him under his
      protection, not at all con amore. It was merely out of politeness
      that he had invited him to the children’s ball.
    

      They did not play cards with him, they did not offer him cigars. No one
      entered into conversation with him. Possibly they recognised the bird by
      its feathers from a distance. Thus, my gentleman, not knowing what to do
      with his hands, was compelled to spend the evening stroking his whiskers.
      His whiskers were really fine, but he stroked them so assiduously that one
      got the feeling that the whiskers had come into the world first and
      afterwards the man in order to stroke them.
    

      There was another guest who interested me. But he was of quite a different
      order. He was a personage. They called him Julian Mastakovich. At first
      glance one could tell he was an honoured guest and stood in the same
      relation to the host as the host to the gentleman of the whiskers. The
      host and hostess said no end of amiable things to him, were most
      attentive, wining him, hovering over him, bringing guests up to be
      introduced, but never leading him to any one else. I noticed tears glisten
      in our host’s eyes when Julian Mastakovich remarked that he had
      rarely spent such a pleasant evening. Somehow I began to feel
      uncomfortable in this personage’s presence. So, after amusing myself
      with the children, five of whom, remarkably well-fed young persons, were
      our host’s, I went into a little sitting-room, entirely unoccupied,
      and seated myself at the end that was a conservatory and took up almost
      half the room.
    

      The children were charming. They absolutely refused to resemble their
      elders, notwithstanding the efforts of mothers and governesses. In a jiffy
      they had denuded the Christmas tree down to the very last sweet and had
      already succeeded in breaking half of their playthings before they even
      found out which belonged to whom.
    

      One of them was a particularly handsome little lad, dark-eyed,
      curly-haired, who stubbornly persisted in aiming at me with his wooden
      gun. But the child that attracted the greatest attention was his sister, a
      girl of about eleven, lovely as a Cupid. She was quiet and thoughtful,
      with large, full, dreamy eyes. The children had somehow offended her, and
      she left them and walked into the same room that I had withdrawn into.
      There she seated herself with her doll in a corner.
    

      “Her father is an immensely wealthy business man,” the guests
      informed each other in tones of awe. “Three hundred thousand rubles
      set aside for her dowry already.”
    

      As I turned to look at the group from which I heard this news item
      issuing, my glance met Julian Mastakovich’s. He stood listening to
      the insipid chatter in an attitude of concentrated attention, with his
      hands behind his back and his head inclined to one side.
    

      All the while I was quite lost in admiration of the shrewdness our host
      displayed in the dispensing of the gifts. The little maid of the
      many-rubied dowry received the handsomest doll, and the rest of the gifts
      were graded in value according to the diminishing scale of the parents’
      stations in life. The last child, a tiny chap of ten, thin, red-haired,
      freckled, came into possession of a small book of nature stories without
      illustrations or even head and tail pieces. He was the governess’s
      child. She was a poor widow, and her little boy, clad in a sorry-looking
      little nankeen jacket, looked thoroughly crushed and intimidated. He took
      the book of nature stories and circled slowly about the children’s
      toys. He would have given anything to play with them. But he did not dare
      to. You could tell he already knew his place.
    

      I like to observe children. It is fascinating to watch the individuality
      in them struggling for self-assertion. I could see that the other children’s
      things had tremendous charm for the red-haired boy, especially a toy
      theatre, in which he was so anxious to take a part that he resolved to
      fawn upon the other children. He smiled and began to play with them. His
      one and only apple he handed over to a puffy urchin whose pockets were
      already crammed with sweets, and he even carried another youngster
      pickaback—all simply that he might be allowed to stay with the
      theatre.
    

      But in a few moments an impudent young person fell on him and gave him a
      pummelling. He did not dare even to cry. The governess came and told him
      to leave off interfering with the other children’s games, and he
      crept away to the same room the little girl and I were in. She let him sit
      down beside her, and the two set themselves busily dressing the expensive
      doll.
    

      Almost half an hour passed, and I was nearly dozing off, as I sat there in
      the conservatory half listening to the chatter of the red-haired boy and
      the dowered beauty, when Julian Mastakovich entered suddenly. He had
      slipped out of the drawing-room under cover of a noisy scene among the
      children. From my secluded corner it had not escaped my notice that a few
      moments before he had been eagerly conversing with the rich girl’s
      father, to whom he had only just been introduced.
    

      He stood still for a while reflecting and mumbling to himself, as if
      counting something on his fingers.
    

      “Three hundred—three hundred—eleven—twelve—thirteen—sixteen—in
      five years! Let’s say four per cent—five times twelve—sixty,
      and on these sixty——. Let us assume that in five years it will
      amount to—well, four hundred. Hm—hm! But the shrewd old fox
      isn’t likely to be satisfied with four per cent. He gets eight or
      even ten, perhaps. Let’s suppose five hundred, five hundred
      thousand, at least, that’s sure. Anything above that for pocket
      money—hm—”
    

      He blew his nose and was about to leave the room when he spied the girl
      and stood still. I, behind the plants, escaped his notice. He seemed to me
      to be quivering with excitement. It must have been his calculations that
      upset him so. He rubbed his hands and danced from place to place, and kept
      getting more and more excited. Finally, however, he conquered his emotions
      and came to a standstill. He cast a determined look at the future bride
      and wanted to move toward her, but glanced about first. Then, as if with a
      guilty conscience, he stepped over to the child on tip-toe, smiling, and
      bent down and kissed her head.
    

      His coming was so unexpected that she uttered a shriek of alarm.
    

      “What are you doing here, dear child?” he whispered, looking
      around and pinching her cheek.
    

      “We’re playing.”
    

      “What, with him?” said Julian Mastakovich with a look askance
      at the governess’s child. “You should go into the
      drawing-room, my lad,” he said to him.
    

      The boy remained silent and looked up at the man with wide-open eyes.
      Julian Mastakovich glanced round again cautiously and bent down over the
      girl.
    

      “What have you got, a doll, my dear?”
    

      “Yes, sir.” The child quailed a little, and her brow wrinkled.
    

      “A doll? And do you know, my dear, what dolls are made of?”
    

      “No, sir,” she said weakly, and lowered her head.
    

      “Out of rags, my dear. You, boy, you go back to the drawing-room, to
      the children,” said Julian Mastakovich looking at the boy sternly.
    

      The two children frowned. They caught hold of each other and would not
      part.
    

      “And do you know why they gave you the doll?” asked Julian
      Mastakovich, dropping his voice lower and lower.
    

      “No.”
    

      “Because you were a good, very good little girl the whole week.”
    

      Saying which, Julian Mastakovich was seized with a paroxysm of agitation.
      He looked round and said in a tone faint, almost inaudible with excitement
      and impatience:
    

      “If I come to visit your parents will you love me, my dear?”
    

      He tried to kiss the sweet little creature, but the red-haired boy saw
      that she was on the verge of tears, and he caught her hand and sobbed out
      loud in sympathy. That enraged the man.
    

      “Go away! Go away! Go back to the other room, to your playmates.”
    

      “I don’t want him to. I don’t want him to! You go away!”
      cried the girl. “Let him alone! Let him alone!” She was almost
      weeping.
    

      There was a sound of footsteps in the doorway. Julian Mastakovich started
      and straightened up his respectable body. The red-haired boy was even more
      alarmed. He let go the girl’s hand, sidled along the wall, and
      escaped through the drawing-room into the dining-room.
    

      Not to attract attention, Julian Mastakovich also made for the
      dining-room. He was red as a lobster. The sight of himself in a mirror
      seemed to embarrass him. Presumably he was annoyed at his own ardour and
      impatience. Without due respect to his importance and dignity, his
      calculations had lured and pricked him to the greedy eagerness of a boy,
      who makes straight for his object—though this was not as yet an
      object; it only would be so in five years’ time. I followed the
      worthy man into the dining-room, where I witnessed a remarkable play.
    

      Julian Mastakovich, all flushed with vexation, venom in his look, began to
      threaten the red-haired boy. The red-haired boy retreated farther and
      farther until there was no place left for him to retreat to, and he did
      not know where to turn in his fright.
    

      “Get out of here! What are you doing here? Get out, I say, you
      good-for-nothing! Stealing fruit, are you? Oh, so, stealing fruit! Get
      out, you freckle face, go to your likes!”
    

      The frightened child, as a last desperate resort, crawled quickly under
      the table. His persecutor, completely infuriated, pulled out his large
      linen handkerchief and used it as a lash to drive the boy out of his
      position.
    

      Here I must remark that Julian Mastakovich was a somewhat corpulent man,
      heavy, well-fed, puffy-cheeked, with a paunch and ankles as round as nuts.
      He perspired and puffed and panted. So strong was his dislike (or was it
      jealousy?) of the child that he actually began to carry on like a madman.
    

      I laughed heartily. Julian Mastakovich turned. He was utterly confused and
      for a moment, apparently, quite oblivious of his immense importance. At
      that moment our host appeared in the doorway opposite. The boy crawled out
      from under the table and wiped his knees and elbows. Julian Mastakovich
      hastened to carry his handkerchief, which he had been dangling by the
      corner, to his nose. Our host looked at the three of us rather
      suspiciously. But, like a man who knows the world and can readily adjust
      himself, he seized upon the opportunity to lay hold of his very valuable
      guest and get what he wanted out of him.
    

      “Here’s the boy I was talking to you about,” he said,
      indicating the red-haired child. “I took the liberty of presuming on
      your goodness in his behalf.”
    

      “Oh,” replied Julian Mastakovich, still not quite master of
      himself.
    

      “He’s my governess’s son,” our host continued in a
      beseeching tone. “She’s a poor creature, the widow of an
      honest official. That’s why, if it were possible for you—”
    

      “Impossible, impossible!” Julian Mastakovich cried hastily.
      “You must excuse me, Philip Alexeyevich, I really cannot. I’ve
      made inquiries. There are no vacancies, and there is a waiting list of ten
      who have a greater right—I’m sorry.”
    

      “Too bad,” said our host. “He’s a quiet,
      unobtrusive child.”
    

      “A very naughty little rascal, I should say,” said Julian
      Mastakovich, wryly. “Go away, boy. Why are you here still? Be off
      with you to the other children.”
    

      Unable to control himself, he gave me a sidelong glance. Nor could I
      control myself. I laughed straight in his face. He turned away and asked
      our host, in tones quite audible to me, who that odd young fellow was.
      They whispered to each other and left the room, disregarding me.
    

      I shook with laughter. Then I, too, went to the drawing-room. There the
      great man, already surrounded by the fathers and mothers and the host and
      the hostess, had begun to talk eagerly with a lady to whom he had just
      been introduced. The lady held the rich little girl’s hand. Julian
      Mastakovich went into fulsome praise of her. He waxed ecstatic over the
      dear child’s beauty, her talents, her grace, her excellent breeding,
      plainly laying himself out to flatter the mother, who listened scarcely
      able to restrain tears of joy, while the father showed his delight by a
      gratified smile.
    

      The joy was contagious. Everybody shared in it. Even the children were
      obliged to stop playing so as not to disturb the conversation. The
      atmosphere was surcharged with awe. I heard the mother of the important
      little girl, touched to her profoundest depths, ask Julian Mastakovich in
      the choicest language of courtesy, whether he would honour them by coming
      to see them. I heard Julian Mastakovich accept the invitation with
      unfeigned enthusiasm. Then the guests scattered decorously to different
      parts of the room, and I heard them, with veneration in their tones, extol
      the business man, the business man’s wife, the business man’s
      daughter, and, especially, Julian Mastakovich.
    

      “Is he married?” I asked out loud of an acquaintance of mine
      standing beside Julian Mastakovich.
    

      Julian Mastakovich gave me a venomous look.
    

      “No,” answered my acquaintance, profoundly shocked by my—intentional—indiscretion.
    








      Not long ago I passed the Church of——. I was struck by the
      concourse of people gathered there to witness a wedding. It was a dreary
      day. A drizzling rain was beginning to come down. I made my way through
      the throng into the church. The bridegroom was a round, well-fed,
      pot-bellied little man, very much dressed up. He ran and fussed about and
      gave orders and arranged things. Finally word was passed that the bride
      was coming. I pushed through the crowd, and I beheld a marvellous beauty
      whose first spring was scarcely commencing. But the beauty was pale and
      sad. She looked distracted. It seemed to me even that her eyes were red
      from recent weeping. The classic severity of every line of her face
      imparted a peculiar significance and solemnity to her beauty. But through
      that severity and solemnity, through the sadness, shone the innocence of a
      child. There was something inexpressibly naÃ¯ve, unsettled and young in her
      features, which, without words, seemed to plead for mercy.
    

      They said she was just sixteen years old. I looked at the bridegroom
      carefully. Suddenly I recognised Julian Mastakovich, whom I had not seen
      again in all those five years. Then I looked at the bride again.—Good
      God! I made my way, as quickly as I could, out of the church. I heard
      gossiping in the crowd about the bride’s wealth—about her
      dowry of five hundred thousand rubles—so and so much for pocket
      money.
    

      “Then his calculations were correct,” I thought, as I pressed
      out into the street.
    











      GOD SEES THE TRUTH, BUT WAITS
    

      BY LEO N. TOLSTOY
    

In the town of
      Vladimir lived a young merchant named Ivan Dmitrich Aksionov. He had two
      shops and a house of his own.
    

      Aksionov was a handsome, fair-haired, curly-headed fellow, full of fun,
      and very fond of singing. When quite a young man he had been given to
      drink, and was riotous when he had had too much; but after he married he
      gave up drinking, except now and then.
    

      One summer Aksionov was going to the Nizhny Fair, and as he bade good-bye
      to his family, his wife said to him, “Ivan Dmitrich, do not start
      to-day; I have had a bad dream about you.”
    

      Aksionov laughed, and said, “You are afraid that when I get to the
      fair I shall go on a spree.”
    

      His wife replied: “I do not know what I am afraid of; all I know is
      that I had a bad dream. I dreamt you returned from the town, and when you
      took off your cap I saw that your hair was quite grey.”
    

      Aksionov laughed. “That’s a lucky sign,” said he.
      “See if I don’t sell out all my goods, and bring you some
      presents from the fair.”
    

      So he said good-bye to his family, and drove away.
    

      When he had travelled half-way, he met a merchant whom he knew, and they
      put up at the same inn for the night. They had some tea together, and then
      went to bed in adjoining rooms.
    

      It was not Aksionov’s habit to sleep late, and, wishing to travel
      while it was still cool, he aroused his driver before dawn, and told him
      to put in the horses.
    

      Then he made his way across to the landlord of the inn (who lived in a
      cottage at the back), paid his bill, and continued his journey.
    

      When he had gone about twenty-five miles, he stopped for the horses to be
      fed. Aksionov rested awhile in the passage of the inn, then he stepped out
      into the porch, and, ordering a samovar to be heated, got out his guitar
      and began to play.
    

      Suddenly a troika drove up with tinkling bells and an official alighted,
      followed by two soldiers. He came to Aksionov and began to question him,
      asking him who he was and whence he came. Aksionov answered him fully, and
      said, “Won’t you have some tea with me?” But the
      official went on cross-questioning him and asking him. “Where did
      you spend last night? Were you alone, or with a fellow-merchant? Did you
      see the other merchant this morning? Why did you leave the inn before
      dawn?”
    

      Aksionov wondered why he was asked all these questions, but he described
      all that had happened, and then added, “Why do you cross-question me
      as if I were a thief or a robber? I am travelling on business of my own,
      and there is no need to question me.”
    

      Then the official, calling the soldiers, said, “I am the
      police-officer of this district, and I question you because the merchant
      with whom you spent last night has been found with his throat cut. We must
      search your things.”
    

      They entered the house. The soldiers and the police-officer unstrapped
      Aksionov’s luggage and searched it. Suddenly the officer drew a
      knife out of a bag, crying, “Whose knife is this?”
    

      Aksionov looked, and seeing a blood-stained knife taken from his bag, he
      was frightened.
    

      “How is it there is blood on this knife?”
    

      Aksionov tried to answer, but could hardly utter a word, and only
      stammered: “I—don’t know—not mine.” Then the
      police-officer said: “This morning the merchant was found in bed
      with his throat cut. You are the only person who could have done it. The
      house was locked from inside, and no one else was there. Here is this
      blood-stained knife in your bag and your face and manner betray you! Tell
      me how you killed him, and how much money you stole?”
    

      Aksionov swore he had not done it; that he had not seen the merchant after
      they had had tea together; that he had no money except eight thousand
      rubles of his own, and that the knife was not his. But his voice was
      broken, his face pale, and he trembled with fear as though he went guilty.
    

      The police-officer ordered the soldiers to bind Aksionov and to put him in
      the cart. As they tied his feet together and flung him into the cart,
      Aksionov crossed himself and wept. His money and goods were taken from
      him, and he was sent to the nearest town and imprisoned there. Enquiries
      as to his character were made in Vladimir. The merchants and other
      inhabitants of that town said that in former days he used to drink and
      waste his time, but that he was a good man. Then the trial came on: he was
      charged with murdering a merchant from Ryazan, and robbing him of twenty
      thousand rubles.
    

      His wife was in despair, and did not know what to believe. Her children
      were all quite small; one was a baby at her breast. Taking them all with
      her, she went to the town where her husband was in jail. At first she was
      not allowed to see him; but after much begging, she obtained permission
      from the officials, and was taken to him. When she saw her husband in
      prison-dress and in chains, shut up with thieves and criminals, she fell
      down, and did not come to her senses for a long time. Then she drew her
      children to her, and sat down near him. She told him of things at home,
      and asked about what had happened to him. He told her all, and she asked,
      “What can we do now?”
    

      “We must petition the Czar not to let an innocent man perish.”
    

      His wife told him that she had sent a petition to the Czar, but it had not
      been accepted.
    

      Aksionov did not reply, but only looked downcast.
    

      Then his wife said, “It was not for nothing I dreamt your hair had
      turned grey. You remember? You should not have started that day.”
      And passing her fingers through his hair, she said: “Vanya dearest,
      tell your wife the truth; was it not you who did it?”
    

      “So you, too, suspect me!” said Aksionov, and, hiding his face
      in his hands, he began to weep. Then a soldier came to say that the wife
      and children must go away; and Aksionov said good-bye to his family for
      the last time.
    

      When they were gone, Aksionov recalled what had been said, and when he
      remembered that his wife also had suspected him, he said to himself,
      “It seems that only God can know the truth; it is to Him alone we
      must appeal, and from Him alone expect mercy.”
    

      And Aksionov wrote no more petitions; gave up all hope, and only prayed to
      God.
    

      Aksionov was condemned to be flogged and sent to the mines. So he was
      flogged with a knot, and when the wounds made by the knot were healed, he
      was driven to Siberia with other convicts.
    

      For twenty-six years Aksionov lived as a convict in Siberia. His hair
      turned white as snow, and his beard grew long, thin, and grey. All his
      mirth went; he stooped; he walked slowly, spoke little, and never laughed,
      but he often prayed.
    

      In prison Aksionov learnt to make boots, and earned a little money, with
      which he bought The Lives of the Saints. He read this book when
      there was light enough in the prison; and on Sundays in the prison-church
      he read the lessons and sang in the choir; for his voice was still good.
    

      The prison authorities liked Aksionov for his meekness, and his
      fellow-prisoners respected him: they called him “Grandfather,”
      and “The Saint.” When they wanted to petition the prison
      authorities about anything, they always made Aksionov their spokesman, and
      when there were quarrels among the prisoners they came to him to put
      things right, and to judge the matter.
    

      No news reached Aksionov from his home, and he did not even know if his
      wife and children were still alive.
    

      One day a fresh gang of convicts came to the prison. In the evening the
      old prisoners collected round the new ones and asked them what towns or
      villages they came from, and what they were sentenced for. Among the rest
      Aksionov sat down near the newcomers, and listened with downcast air to
      what was said.
    

      One of the new convicts, a tall, strong man of sixty, with a
      closely-cropped grey beard, was telling the others what he had been
      arrested for.
    

      “Well, friends,” he said, “I only took a horse that was
      tied to a sledge, and I was arrested and accused of stealing. I said I had
      only taken it to get home quicker, and had then let it go; besides, the
      driver was a personal friend of mine. So I said, ‘It’s all
      right.’ 'No,’ said they, ‘you stole it.’ But how
      or where I stole it they could not say. I once really did something wrong,
      and ought by rights to have come here long ago, but that time I was not
      found out. Now I have been sent here for nothing at all... Eh, but it’s
      lies I’m telling you; I’ve been to Siberia before, but I did
      not stay long.”
    

      “Where are you from?” asked some one.
    

      “From Vladimir. My family are of that town. My name is Makar, and
      they also call me Semyonich.”
    

      Aksionov raised his head and said: “Tell me, Semyonich, do you know
      anything of the merchants Aksionov of Vladimir? Are they still alive?”
    

      “Know them? Of course I do. The Aksionovs are rich, though their
      father is in Siberia: a sinner like ourselves, it seems! As for you, Gran’dad,
      how did you come here?”
    

      Aksionov did not like to speak of his misfortune. He only sighed, and
      said, “For my sins I have been in prison these twenty-six years.”
    

      “What sins?” asked Makar Semyonich.
    

      But Aksionov only said, “Well, well—I must have deserved it!”
      He would have said no more, but his companions told the newcomers how
      Aksionov came to be in Siberia; how some one had killed a merchant, and
      had put the knife among Aksionov’s things, and Aksionov had been
      unjustly condemned.
    

      When Makar Semyonich heard this, he looked at Aksionov, slapped his own
      knee, and exclaimed, “Well, this is wonderful! Really wonderful! But
      how old you’ve grown, Gran’dad!”
    

      The others asked him why he was so surprised, and where he had seen
      Aksionov before; but Makar Semyonich did not reply. He only said: “It’s
      wonderful that we should meet here, lads!”
    

      These words made Aksionov wonder whether this man knew who had killed the
      merchant; so he said, “Perhaps, Semyonich, you have heard of that
      affair, or maybe you’ve seen me before?”
    

      “How could I help hearing? The world’s full of rumours. But it’s
      a long time ago, and I’ve forgotten what I heard.”
    

      “Perhaps you heard who killed the merchant?” asked Aksionov.
    

      Makar Semyonich laughed, and replied: “It must have been him in
      whose bag the knife was found! If some one else hid the knife there,
      ‘He’s not a thief till he’s caught,’ as the saying
      is. How could any one put a knife into your bag while it was under your
      head? It would surely have woke you up.”
    

      When Aksionov heard these words, he felt sure this was the man who had
      killed the merchant. He rose and went away. All that night Aksionov lay
      awake. He felt terribly unhappy, and all sorts of images rose in his mind.
      There was the image of his wife as she was when he parted from her to go
      to the fair. He saw her as if she were present; her face and her eyes rose
      before him; he heard her speak and laugh. Then he saw his children, quite
      little, as they were at that time: one with a little cloak on, another at
      his mother’s breast. And then he remembered himself as he used to
      be-young and merry. He remembered how he sat playing the guitar in the
      porch of the inn where he was arrested, and how free from care he had
      been. He saw, in his mind, the place where he was flogged, the
      executioner, and the people standing around; the chains, the convicts, all
      the twenty-six years of his prison life, and his premature old age. The
      thought of it all made him so wretched that he was ready to kill himself.
    

      “And it’s all that villain’s doing!” thought
      Aksionov. And his anger was so great against Makar Semyonich that he
      longed for vengeance, even if he himself should perish for it. He kept
      repeating prayers all night, but could get no peace. During the day he did
      not go near Makar Semyonich, nor even look at him.
    

      A fortnight passed in this way. Aksionov could not sleep at night, and was
      so miserable that he did not know what to do.
    

      One night as he was walking about the prison he noticed some earth that
      came rolling out from under one of the shelves on which the prisoners
      slept. He stopped to see what it was. Suddenly Makar Semyonich crept out
      from under the shelf, and looked up at Aksionov with frightened face.
      Aksionov tried to pass without looking at him, but Makar seized his hand
      and told him that he had dug a hole under the wall, getting rid of the
      earth by putting it into his high-boots, and emptying it out every day on
      the road when the prisoners were driven to their work.
    

      “Just you keep quiet, old man, and you shall get out too. If you
      blab, they’ll flog the life out of me, but I will kill you first.”
    

      Aksionov trembled with anger as he looked at his enemy. He drew his hand
      away, saying, “I have no wish to escape, and you have no need to
      kill me; you killed me long ago! As to telling of you—I may do so or
      not, as God shall direct.”
    

      Next day, when the convicts were led out to work, the convoy soldiers
      noticed that one or other of the prisoners emptied some earth out of his
      boots. The prison was searched and the tunnel found. The Governor came and
      questioned all the prisoners to find out who had dug the hole. They all
      denied any knowledge of it. Those who knew would not betray Makar
      Semyonich, knowing he would be flogged almost to death. At last the
      Governor turned to Aksionov whom he knew to be a just man, and said:
    

      “You are a truthful old man; tell me, before God, who dug the hole?”
    

      Makar Semyonich stood as if he were quite unconcerned, looking at the
      Governor and not so much as glancing at Aksionov. Aksionov’s lips
      and hands trembled, and for a long time he could not utter a word. He
      thought, “Why should I screen him who ruined my life? Let him pay
      for what I have suffered. But if I tell, they will probably flog the life
      out of him, and maybe I suspect him wrongly. And, after all, what good
      would it be to me?”
    

      “Well, old man,” repeated the Governor, “tell me the
      truth: who has been digging under the wall?”
    

      Aksionov glanced at Makar Semyonich, and said, “I cannot say, your
      honour. It is not God’s will that I should tell! Do what you like
      with me; I am in your hands.”
    

      However much the Governor tried, Aksionov would say no more, and so the
      matter had to be left.
    

      That night, when Aksionov was lying on his bed and just beginning to doze,
      some one came quietly and sat down on his bed. He peered through the
      darkness and recognised Makar.
    

      “What more do you want of me?” asked Aksionov. “Why have
      you come here?”
    

      Makar Semyonich was silent. So Aksionov sat up and said, “What do
      you want? Go away, or I will call the guard!”
    

      Makar Semyonich bent close over Aksionov, and whispered, “Ivan
      Dmitrich, forgive me!”
    

      “What for?” asked Aksionov.
    

      “It was I who killed the merchant and hid the knife among your
      things. I meant to kill you too, but I heard a noise outside, so I hid the
      knife in your bag and escaped out of the window.”
    

      Aksionov was silent, and did not know what to say. Makar Semyonich slid
      off the bed-shelf and knelt upon the ground. “Ivan Dmitrich,”
      said he, “forgive me! For the love of God, forgive me! I will
      confess that it was I who killed the merchant, and you will be released
      and can go to your home.”
    

      “It is easy for you to talk,” said Aksionov, “but I have
      suffered for you these twenty-six years. Where could I go to now?... My
      wife is dead, and my children have forgotten me. I have nowhere to go...”
    

      Makar Semyonich did not rise, but beat his head on the floor. “Ivan
      Dmitrich, forgive me!” he cried. “When they flogged me with
      the knot it was not so hard to bear as it is to see you now ... yet you
      had pity on me, and did not tell. For Christ’s sake forgive me,
      wretch that I am!” And he began to sob.
    

      When Aksionov heard him sobbing he, too, began to weep. “God will
      forgive you!” said he. “Maybe I am a hundred times worse than
      you.” And at these words his heart grew light, and the longing for
      home left him. He no longer had any desire to leave the prison, but only
      hoped for his last hour to come.
    

      In spite of what Aksionov had said, Makar Semyonich confessed his guilt.
      But when the order for his release came, Aksionov was already dead.
    











      HOW A MUZHIK FED TWO OFFICIALS
    

      BY M.Y. SALTYKOV [N.Shchedrin]
    

      Once upon a time there were two Officials. They were both empty-headed,
      and so they found themselves one day suddenly transported to an
      uninhabited isle, as if on a magic carpet.
    

      They had passed their whole life in a Government Department, where records
      were kept; had been born there, bred there, grown old there, and
      consequently hadn’t the least understanding for anything outside of
      the Department; and the only words they knew were: “With assurances
      of the highest esteem, I am your humble servant.”
    

      But the Department was abolished, and as the services of the two Officials
      were no longer needed, they were given their freedom. So the retired
      Officials migrated to Podyacheskaya Street in St. Petersburg. Each had his
      own home, his own cook and his pension.
    

      Waking up on the uninhabited isle, they found themselves lying under the
      same cover. At first, of course, they couldn’t understand what had
      happened to them, and they spoke as if nothing extraordinary had taken
      place.
    

      “What a peculiar dream I had last night, your Excellency,”
      said the one Official. “It seemed to me as if I were on an
      uninhabited isle.”
    

      Scarcely had he uttered the words, when he jumped to his feet. The other
      Official also jumped up.
    

      “Good Lord, what does this mean! Where are we?” they cried out
      in astonishment.
    

      They felt each other to make sure that they were no longer dreaming, and
      finally convinced themselves of the sad reality.
    

      Before them stretched the ocean, and behind them was a little spot of
      earth, beyond which the ocean stretched again. They began to cry—the
      first time since their Department had been shut down.
    

      They looked at each other, and each noticed that the other was clad in
      nothing but his night shirt with his order hanging about his neck.
    

      “We really should be having our coffee now,” observed the one
      Official. Then he bethought himself again of the strange situation he was
      in and a second time fell to weeping.
    

      “What are we going to do now?” he sobbed. “Even
      supposing we were to draw up a report, what good would that do?”
    

      “You know what, your Excellency,” replied the other Official,
      “you go to the east and I will go to the west. Toward evening we
      will come back here again and, perhaps, we shall have found something.”
    

      They started to ascertain which was the east and which was the west. They
      recalled that the head of their Department had once said to them, “If
      you want to know where the east is, then turn your face to the north, and
      the east will be on your right.” But when they tried to find out
      which was the north, they turned to the right and to the left and looked
      around on all sides. Having spent their whole life in the Department of
      Records, their efforts were all in vain.
    

      “To my mind, your Excellency, the best thing to do would be for you
      to go to the right and me to go to the left,” said one Official, who
      had served not only in the Department of Records, but had also been
      teacher of handwriting in the School for Reserves, and so was a little bit
      cleverer.
    

      So said, so done. The one Official went to the right. He came upon trees,
      bearing all sorts of fruits. Gladly would he have plucked an apple, but
      they all hung so high that he would have been obliged to climb up. He
      tried to climb up in vain. All he succeeded in doing was tearing his night
      shirt. Then he struck upon a brook. It was swarming with fish.
    

      “Wouldn’t it be wonderful if we had all this fish in
      Podyacheskaya Street!” he thought, and his mouth watered. Then he
      entered woods and found partridges, grouse and hares.
    

      “Good Lord, what an abundance of food!” he cried. His hunger
      was going up tremendously.
    

      But he had to return to the appointed spot with empty hands. He found the
      other Official waiting for him.
    

      “Well, Your Excellency, how went it? Did you find anything?”
    

      “Nothing but an old number of the Moscow Gazette, not another
      thing.”
    

      The Officials lay down to sleep again, but their empty stomachs gave them
      no rest They were partly robbed of their sleep by the thought of who was
      now enjoying their pension, and partly by the recollection of the fruit,
      fishes, partridges, grouse and hares that they had seen during the day.
    

      “The human pabulum in its original form flies, swims and grows on
      trees. Who would have thought it your Excellency?” said the one
      Official.
    

      “To be sure,” rejoined the other Official. “I, too, must
      admit that I had imagined that our breakfast rolls, came into the world
      just as they appear on the table.”
    

      “From which it is to be deduced that if we want to eat a pheasant,
      we must catch it first, kill it, pull its feathers and roast it. But how’s
      that to be done?”
    

      “Yes, how’s that to be done?” repeated the other
      Official.
    

      They turned silent and tried again to fall asleep, but their hunger scared
      sleep away. Before their eyes swarmed flocks of pheasants and ducks, herds
      of porklings, and they were all so juicy, done so tenderly and garnished
      so deliciously with olives, capers and pickles.
    

      “I believe I could devour my own boots now,” said the one
      Official.
    

      “Gloves, are not bad either, especially if they have been born quite
      mellow,” said the other Official.
    

      The two Officials stared at each other fixedly. In their glances gleamed
      an evil-boding fire, their teeth chattered and a dull groaning issued from
      their breasts. Slowly they crept upon each other and suddenly they burst
      into a fearful frenzy. There was a yelling and groaning, the rags flew
      about, and the Official who had been teacher of handwriting bit off his
      colleague’s order and swallowed it. However, the sight of blood
      brought them both back to their senses.
    

      “God help us!” they cried at the same time. “We
      certainly don’t mean to eat each other up. How could we have come to
      such a pass as this? What evil genius is making sport of us?”
    

      “We must, by all means, entertain each other to pass the time away,
      otherwise there will be murder and death,” said the one Official.
    

      “You begin,” said the other.
    

      “Can you explain why it is that the sun first rises and then sets?
      Why isn’t it the reverse?”
    

      “Aren’t you a funny man, your Excellency? You get up first,
      then you go to your office and work there, and at night you lie down to
      sleep.”
    

      “But why can’t one assume the opposite, that is, that one goes
      to bed, sees all sorts of dream figures, and then gets up?”
    

      “Well, yes, certainly. But when I was still an Official, I always
      thought this way: ‘Now it is dawn, then it will be day, then will
      come supper, and finally will come the time to go to bed.’”
    

      The word “supper” recalled that incident in the day’s
      doings, and the thought of it made both Officials melancholy, so that the
      conversation came to a halt.
    

      “A doctor once told me that human beings can sustain themselves for
      a long time on their own juices,” the one Official began again.
    

      “What does that mean?”
    

      “It is quite simple. You see, one’s own juices generate other
      juices, and these in their turn still other juices, and so it goes on
      until finally all the juices are consumed.”
    

      “And then what happens?”
    

      “Then food has to be taken into the system again.”
    

      “The devil!”
    

      No matter what topic the Officials chose, the conversation invariably
      reverted to the subject of eating; which only increased their appetite
      more and more. So they decided to give up talking altogether, and,
      recollecting the Moscow Gazette that the one of them had found,
      they picked it up and began to read eagerly.
    

      BANQUET GIVEN BY THE MAYOR
    

"The table was set
      for one hundred persons. The magnificence of it exceeded all expectations.
      The remotest provinces were represented at this feast of the gods by the
      costliest gifts. The golden sturgeon from Sheksna and the silver pheasant
      from the Caucasian woods held a rendezvous with strawberries so seldom to
      be had in our latitude in winter...”
    

      “The devil! For God’s sake, stop reading, your Excellency.
      Couldn’t you find something else to read about?” cried the
      other Official in sheer desperation. He snatched the paper from his
      colleague’s hands, and started to read something else.
    

      “Our correspondent in Tula informs us that yesterday a sturgeon was
      found in the Upa (an event which even the oldest inhabitants cannot
      recall, and all the more remarkable since they recognised the former
      police captain in this sturgeon). This was made the occasion for giving a
      banquet in the club. The prime cause of the banquet was served in a large
      wooden platter garnished with vinegar pickles. A bunch of parsley stuck
      out of its mouth. Doctor P—— who acted as toast-master saw to
      it that everybody present got a piece of the sturgeon. The sauces to go
      with it were unusually varied and delicate—”
    

      “Permit me, your Excellency, it seems to me you are not so careful
      either in the selection of reading matter,” interrupted the first
      Official, who secured the Gazette again and started to read:
    

      “One of the oldest inhabitants of Viatka has discovered a new and
      highly original recipe for fish soup; A live codfish (lota vulgaris)
      is taken and beaten with a rod until its liver swells up with anger...”
    

      The Officials’ heads drooped. Whatever their eyes fell upon had
      something to do with eating. Even their own thoughts were fatal. No matter
      how much they tried to keep their minds off beefsteak and the like, it was
      all in vain; their fancy returned invariably, with irresistible force,
      back to that for which they were so painfully yearning.
    

      Suddenly an inspiration came to the Official who had once taught
      handwriting.
    

      “I have it!” he cried delightedly. “What do you say to
      this, your Excellency? What do you say to our finding a muzhik?”
    

      “A muzhik, your Excellency? What sort of a muzhik?”
    

      “Why a plain ordinary muzhik. A muzhik like all other muzhiks. He
      would get the breakfast rolls for us right away, and he could also catch
      partridges and fish for us.”
    

      “Hm, a muzhik. But where are we to fetch one from, if there is no
      muzhik here?”
    

      “Why shouldn’t there be a muzhik here? There are muzhiks
      everywhere. All one has to do is hunt for them. There certainly must be a
      muzhik hiding here somewhere so as to get out of working.”
    

      This thought so cheered the Officials that they instantly jumped up to go
      in search of a muzhik.
    

      For a long while they wandered about on the island without the desired
      result, until finally a concentrated smell of black bread and old sheep
      skin assailed their nostrils and guided them in the right direction. There
      under a tree was a colossal muzhik lying fast asleep with his hands under
      his head. It was clear that to escape his duty to work he had impudently
      withdrawn to this island. The indignation of the Officials knew no bounds.
    

      “What, lying asleep here you lazy-bones you!” they raged at
      him, “It is nothing to you that there are two Officials here who are
      fairly perishing of hunger. Up, forward, march, work.”
    

      The Muzhik rose and looked at the two severe gentlemen standing in front
      of him. His first thought was to make his escape, but the Officials held
      him fast.
    

      He had to submit to his fate. He had to work.
    

      First he climbed up on a tree and plucked several dozen of the finest
      apples for the Officials. He kept a rotten one for himself. Then he turned
      up the earth and dug out some potatoes. Next he started a fire with two
      bits of wood that he rubbed against each other. Out of his own hair he
      made a snare and caught partridges. Over the fire, by this time burning
      brightly, he cooked so many kinds of food that the question arose in the
      Officials’ minds whether they shouldn’t give some to this
      idler.
    

      Beholding the efforts of the Muzhik, they rejoiced in their hearts. They
      had already forgotten how the day before they had nearly been perishing of
      hunger, and all they thought of now was: “What a good thing it is to
      be an Official. Nothing bad can ever happen to an Official.”
    

      “Are you satisfied, gentlemen?” the lazy Muzhik asked.
    

      “Yes, we appreciate your industry,” replied the Officials.
    

      “Then you will permit me to rest a little?”
    

      “Go take a little rest, but first make a good strong cord.”
    

      The Muzhik gathered wild hemp stalks, laid them in water, beat them and
      broke them, and toward evening a good stout cord was ready. The Officials
      took the cord and bound the Muzhik to a tree, so that he should not run
      away. Then they laid themselves to sleep.
    

      Thus day after day passed, and the Muzhik became so skilful that he could
      actually cook soup for the Officials in his bare hands. The Officials had
      become round and well-fed and happy. It rejoiced them that here they needn’t
      spend any money and that in the meanwhile their pensions were accumulating
      in St. Petersburg.
    

      “What is your opinion, your Excellency,” one said to the other
      after breakfast one day, “is the Story of the Tower of Babel true?
      Don’t you think it is simply an allegory?”
    

      “By no means, your Excellency, I think it was something that really
      happened. What other explanation is there for the existence of so many
      different languages on earth?”
    

      “Then the Flood must really have taken place, too?”
    

      “Certainly, else; how would you explain the existence of
      Antediluvian animals? Besides, the Moscow Gazette says——”
    

      They made search for the old number of the Moscow Gazette, seated
      themselves in the shade, and read the whole sheet from beginning to end.
      They read of festivities in Moscow, Tula, Penza and Riazan, and strangely
      enough felt no discomfort at the description of the delicacies served.
    

      There is no saying how long this life might have lasted. Finally, however,
      it began to bore the Officials. They often thought of their cooks in St.
      Petersburg, and even shed a few tears in secret.
    

      “I wonder how it looks in Podyacheskaya Street now, your Excellency,”
      one of them said to the other.
    

      “Oh, don’t remind me of it, your Excellency. I am pining away
      with homesickness.”
    

      “It is very nice here. There is really no fault to be found with
      this place, but the lamb longs for its mother sheep. And it is a pity,
      too, for the beautiful uniforms.”
    

      “Yes, indeed, a uniform of the fourth class is no joke. The gold
      embroidery alone is enough to make one dizzy.”
    

      Now they began to importune the Muzhik to find some way of getting them
      back to Podyacheskaya Street, and strange to say, the Muzhik even knew
      where Podyacheskaya Street was. He had once drunk beer and mead there, and
      as the saying goes, everything had run down his beard, alas, but nothing
      into his mouth. The Officials rejoiced and said: “We are Officials
      from Podyacheskaya Street.”
    

      “And I am one of those men—do you remember?—who sit on a
      scaffolding hung by ropes from the roofs and paint the outside walls. I am
      one of those who crawl about on the roofs like flies. That is what I am,”
      replied the Muzhik.
    

      The Muzhik now pondered long and heavily on how to give great pleasure to
      his Officials, who had been so gracious to him, the lazy-bones, and had
      not scorned his work. And he actually succeeded in constructing a ship. It
      was not really a ship, but still it was a vessel, that would carry them
      across the ocean close to Podyacheskaya Street.
    

      “Now, take care, you dog, that you don’t drown us,” said
      the Officials, when they saw the raft rising and falling on the waves.
    

      “Don’t be afraid. We muzhiks are used to this,” said the
      Muzhik, making all the preparations for the journey. He gathered swan’s-down
      and made a couch for his two Officials, then he crossed himself and rowed
      off from shore.
    

      How frightened the Officials were on the way, how seasick they were during
      the storms, how they scolded the coarse Muzhik for his idleness, can
      neither be told nor described. The Muzhik, however, just kept rowing on
      and fed his Officials on herring. At last, they caught sight of dear old
      Mother Neva. Soon they were in the glorious Catherine Canal, and then, oh
      joy! they struck the grand Podyacheskaya Street. When the cooks saw their
      Officials so well-fed, round and so happy, they rejoiced immensely. The
      Officials drank coffee and rolls, then put on their uniforms and drove to
      the Pension Bureau. How much money they collected there is another thing
      that can neither be told nor described. Nor was the Muzhik forgotten. The
      Officials sent a glass of whiskey out to him and five kopeks. Now, Muzhik,
      rejoice.
    











      THE SHADES, A PHANTASY
    

      BY VLADIMIR G. KORLENKO
    

      I
    

A month and two
      days had elapsed since the judges, amid the loud acclaim of the Athenian
      people, had pronounced the death sentence against the philosopher Socrates
      because he had sought to destroy faith in the gods. What the gadfly is to
      the horse Socrates was to Athens. The gadfly stings the horse in order to
      prevent it from dozing off and to keep it moving briskly on its course.
      The philosopher said to the people of Athens:
    

      “I am your gadfly. My sting pricks your conscience and arouses you
      when you are caught napping. Sleep not, sleep not, people of Athens; awake
      and seek the truth!”
    

      The people arose in their exasperation and cruelly demanded to be rid of
      their gadfly.
    

      “Perchance both of his accusers, Meletus and Anytus, are wrong,”
      said the citizens, on leaving the court after sentence had been
      pronounced.
    

      “But after all whither do his doctrines tend? What would he do? He
      has wrought confusion, he overthrows beliefs that have existed since the
      beginning, he speaks of new virtues which must be recognised and sought
      for, he speaks of a Divinity hitherto unknown to us. The blasphemer, he
      deems himself wiser than the gods! No, ‘twere better we remain true
      to the old gods whom we know. They may not always be just, sometimes they
      may flare up in unjust wrath, and they may also be seized with a wanton
      lust for the wives of mortals; but did not our ancestors live with them in
      the peace of their souls, did not our forefathers accomplish their heroic
      deeds with the help of these very gods? And now the faces of the Olympians
      have paled and the old virtue is out of joint. What does it all lead to?
      Should not an end be put to this impious wisdom once for all?”
    

      Thus the citizens of Athens spoke to one another as they left the place,
      and the blue twilight was falling. They had determined to kill the
      restless gadfly in the hope that the countenances of the gods would shine
      again. And yet—before their souls arose the mild figure of the
      singular philosopher. There were some citizens who recalled how
      courageously he had shared their troubles and dangers at PotidÃ¦a; how he
      alone had prevented them from committing the sin of unjustly executing the
      generals after the victory over the ArginusÃ¦e; how he alone had dared to
      raise his voice against the tyrants who had had fifteen hundred people put
      to death, speaking to the people on the market-place concerning shepherds
      and their sheep.
    

      “Is not he a good shepherd,” he asked, “who guards his
      flock and watches over its increase? Or is it the work of the good
      shepherd to reduce the number of his sheep and disperse them, and of the
      good ruler to do the same with his people? Men of Athens, let us
      investigate this question!”
    

      And at this question of the solitary, undefended philosopher, the faces of
      the tyrants paled, while the eyes of the youths kindled with the fire of
      just wrath and indignation.
    

      Thus, when on dispersing after the sentence the Athenians recalled all
      these things of Socrates, their hearts were oppressed with heavy doubt.
    

      “Have we not done a cruel wrong to the son of Sophroniscus?”
    

      But then the good Athenians looked upon the harbour and the sea, and in
      the red glow of the dying day they saw the purple sails of the
      sharp-keeled ship, sent to the Delian festival, shimmering in the distance
      on the blue Pontus. The ship would not return until the expiration of a
      month, and the Athenians recollected that during this time no blood might
      be shed in Athens, whether the blood of the innocent or the guilty. A
      month, moreover, has many days and still more hours. Supposing the son of
      Sophroniscus had been unjustly condemned, who would hinder his escaping
      from the prison, especially since he had numerous friends to help him? Was
      it so difficult for the rich Plato, for Ãschines and others to bribe the
      guards? Then the restless gadfly would flee from Athens to the barbarians
      in Thessaly, or to the Peloponnesus, or, still farther, to Egypt; Athens
      would no longer hear his blasphemous speeches; his death would not weigh
      upon the conscience of the worthy citizens, and so everything would end
      for the best of all.
    

      Thus said many to themselves that evening, while aloud they praised the
      wisdom of the demos and the heliasts. In secret, however, they cherished
      the hope that the restless philosopher would leave Athens, fly from the
      hemlock to the barbarians, and so free the Athenians of his troublesome
      presence and of the pangs of consciences that smote them for inflicting
      death upon an innocent man.
    

      Two and thirty times since that evening had the sun risen from the ocean
      and dipped down into it again. The ship had returned from Delos and lay in
      the harbour with sadly drooping sails, as if ashamed of its native city.
      The moon did not shine in the heavens, the sea heaved under a heavy fog,
      and on the hills lights peered through the obscurity like the eyes of men
      gripped by a sense of guilt.
    

      The stubborn Socrates did not spare the conscience of the good Athenians.
    

      “We part! You go home and I go to death,” he said to the
      judges after the sentence had been pronounced. “I know not, my
      friends, which of us chooses the better lot!”
    

      As the time had approached for the return of the ship, many of the
      citizens had begun to feel uneasy. Must that obstinate fellow really die?
      And they began to appeal to the consciences of Ãschines, PhÃ¦do, and other
      pupils of Socrates, trying to urge them on to further efforts for their
      master.
    

      “Will you permit your teacher to die?” they asked
      reproachfully in biting tones. “Or do you grudge the few coins it
      would take to bribe the guard?”
    

      In vain Crito besought Socrates to take to flight, and complained that the
      public, was upbraiding his disciples with lack of friendship and with
      avarice. The self-willed philosopher refused to gratify his pupils or the
      good people of Athens.
    

      “Let us investigate.” he said. “If it turns out that I
      must flee, I will flee; but if I must die, I will die. Let us remember
      what we once said—the wise man need not fear death, he need fear
      nothing but falsehood. Is it right to abide by the laws we ourselves have
      made so long as they are agreeable to us, and refuse to obey those which
      are disagreeable? If my memory does not deceive me I believe we once spoke
      of these things, did we not?”
    

      “Yes, we did,” answered his pupil.
    

      “And I think all were agreed as to the answer?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “But perhaps what is true for others is not true for us?”
    

      “No, truth is alike for all, including ourselves.”
    

      “But perhaps when we must die and not some one else, truth
      becomes untruth?”
    

      “No, Socrates, truth remains the truth under all circumstances.”
    

      After his pupil had thus agreed to each premise of Socrates in turn, he
      smiled and drew his conclusion.
    

      “If that is so, my friend, mustn’t I die? Or has my head
      already become so weak that I am no longer in a condition to draw a
      logical conclusion? Then correct me, my friend and show my erring brain
      the right way.”
    

      His pupil covered his face with his mantle and turned aside.
    

      “Yes,” he said, “now I see you must die.”
    

      And on that evening when the sea tossed hither and thither and roared
      dully under the load of fog, and the whimsical wind in mournful
      astonishment gently stirred the sails of the ships; when the citizens
      meeting on the streets asked one another: “Is he dead?” and
      their voices timidly betrayed the hope that he was not dead; when the
      first breath of awakened conscience, touched the hearts of the Athenians
      like the first messenger of the storm; and when, it seemed the very faces
      of the gods were darkened with shame—on that evening at the sinking
      of the sun the self-willed man drank the cup of death!
    

      The wind increased in violence and shrouded the city more closely in the
      veil of mist, angrily tugging at the sails of the vessels delayed in the
      harbour. And the Erinyes sang their gloomy songs to the hearts of the
      citizens and whipped up in their breasts that tempest which was later, to
      overwhelm the denouncers of Socrates.
    

      But in that hour the first stirrings of regret were still uncertain and
      confused. The citizens found more fault with Socrates than ever because he
      had not given them the satisfaction of fleeing to Thessaly; they were
      annoyed with his pupils because in the last days they had walked about in
      sombre mourning attire, a living reproach to the Athenians; they were
      vexed with the judges because they had not had the sense and the courage
      to resist the blind rage of the excited people; they bore even the gods
      resentment.
    

      “To you, ye gods, have we brought this sacrifice,” spoke many.
      “Rejoice, ye unsatiable!”
    

      “I know not which of us chooses the better lot!”
    

      Those words of Socrates came back to their memory, those his last words to
      the judges and to the people gathered in the court. Now he lay in the
      prison quiet and motionless under his cloak, while over the city hovered
      mourning, horror, and shame.
    

      Again he became the tormentor of the city, he who was himself no longer
      accessible to torment. The gadfly had been killed, but it stung the people
      more sharply than ever—sleep not, sleep not this night, O men of
      Athens! Sleep not! You have committed an injustice, a cruel injustice,
      which can never be erased!
    

      II
    

During those sad
      days Xenophon, the general, a pupil of Socrates, was marching with his Ten
      Thousand in a distant land, amid dangers, seeking a way of return to his
      beloved fatherland.
    

      Ãschines, Crito, Critobulus, PhÃ¦do, and Apollodorus were now occupied with
      the preparations for the modest funeral.
    

      Plato was burning his lamp and bending over a parchment; the best disciple
      of the philosopher was busy inscribing the deeds, words, and teachings
      that marked the end of the sage’s life. A thought is never lost, and
      the truth discovered by a great intellect illumines the way for future
      generations like a torch in the dark.
    

      There was one other disciple of Socrates. Not long before, the impetuous
      Ctesippus had been one of the most frivolous and pleasure-seeking of the
      Athenian youths. He had set up beauty as his sole god, and had bowed
      before Clinias as its highest exemplar. But since he had become acquainted
      with Socrates, all desire for pleasure and all light-mindedness had gone
      from him. He looked on indifferently while others took his place with
      Clinias. The grace of thought and the harmony of spirit that he found in
      Socrates seemed a hundred times more attractive than the graceful form and
      the harmonious features of Clinias. With all the intensity of his stormy
      temperament he hung on the man who had disturbed the serenity of his
      virginal soul, which for the first time opened to doubts as the bud of a
      young oak opens to the fresh winds of spring.
    

      Now that the master was dead, he could find peace neither at his own
      hearth nor in the oppressive stillness of the streets nor among his
      friends and fellow-disciples. The gods of hearth and home and the gods of
      the people inspired him with repugnance.
    

      “I know not,” he said, “whether ye are the best of all
      the gods to whom numerous generations have burned incense and brought
      offerings; all I know is that for your sake the blind mob extinguished the
      clear torch of truth, and for your sake sacrificed the greatest and best
      of mortals!”
    

      It almost seemed to Ctesippus as though the streets and market-places
      still echoed with the shrieking of that unjust sentence. And he remembered
      how it was here that the people clamoured for the execution of the
      generals who had led them to victory against the ArgunisÃ¦, and how
      Socrates alone had opposed the savage sentence of the judges and the blind
      rage of the mob. But when Socrates himself needed a champion, no one had
      been found to defend him with equal strength. Ctesippus blamed himself and
      his friends, and for that reason he wanted to avoid everybody—even
      himself, if possible.
    

      That evening he went to the sea. But his grief grew only the more violent.
      It seemed to him that the mourning daughters of Nereus were tossing hither
      and thither on the shore bewailing the death of the best of the Athenians
      and the folly of the frenzied city. The waves broke on the rocky coast
      with a growl of lament. Their booming sounded like a funeral dirge.
    

      He turned away, left the shore, and went on further without looking before
      him. He forgot time and space and his own ego, filled only with the
      afflicting thought of Socrates!
    

      “Yesterday he still was, yesterday his mild words still could be
      heard. How is it possible that to-day he no longer is? O night, O giant
      mountain shrouded in mist, O heaving sea moved by your own life, O
      restless winds that carry the breath of an immeasurable world on your
      wings, O starry vault flecked with flying clouds—take me to you,
      disclose to me the mystery of this death, if it is revealed to you! And if
      ye know not, then grant my ignorant soul your own lofty indifference.
      Remove from me these torturing questions. I no longer have strength to
      carry them in my bosom without an answer, without even the hope of an
      answer. For who shall answer them, now that the lips of Socrates are
      sealed in eternal silence, and eternal darkness is laid upon his lids?”
    

      Thus Ctesippus cried out to the sea and the mountains, and to the dark
      night, which followed its invariable course, ceaselessly, invisibly, over
      the slumbering world. Many hours passed before Ctesippus glanced up and
      saw whither his steps had unconsciously led him. A dark horror seized his
      soul as he looked about him.
    

      III
    

It seemed as if the
      unknown gods of eternal night had heard his impious prayer. Ctesippus
      looked about, without being able to recognise the place where he was. The
      lights of the city had long been extinguished by the darkness. The roaring
      of the sea had died away in the distance; his anxious soul had even lost
      the recollection of having heard it. No single sound—no mournful cry
      of nocturnal bird, nor whirr of wings, nor rustling of trees, nor murmur
      of a merry stream—broke the deep silence. Only the blind will-o’-the-wisps
      flickered here and there over rocks, and sheet-lightning, unaccompanied by
      any sound, flared up and died down against crag-peaks. This brief
      illumination merely emphasised the darkness; and the dead light disclosed
      the outlines of dead deserts crossed by gorges like crawling serpents, and
      rising into rocky heights in a wild chaos.
    

      All the joyous gods that haunt green groves, purling brooks, and mountain
      valleys seemed to have fled forever from these deserts. Pan alone, the
      great and mysterious Pan, was hiding somewhere nearby in the chaos of
      nature, and with mocking glance seemed to be pursuing the tiny ant that a
      short time before had blasphemously asked to know the secret of the world
      and of death. Dark, senseless horror overwhelmed the soul of Ctesippus. It
      is thus that the sea in stormy floodtide overwhelms a rock on the shore.
    

      Was it a dream, was it reality, or was it the revelation of the unknown
      divinity? Ctesippus felt that in an instant he would step across the
      threshold of life, and that his soul would melt into an ocean of unending,
      inconceivable horror like a drop of rain in the waves of the grey sea on a
      dark and stormy night. But at this moment he suddenly heard voices that
      seemed familiar to him, and in the glare of the sheet-lightning his eyes
      recognised human figures.
    

      IV
    

On a rocky slope
      sat a man in deep despair. He had thrown a cloak over his head and was
      bowed to the ground. Another figure approached him softly, cautiously
      climbing upward and carefully feeling every step. The first man uncovered
      his face and exclaimed:
    

      “Is that you I just now saw, my good Socrates? Is that you passing
      by me in this cheerless place? I have already spent many hours here
      without knowing when day will relieve the night. I have been waiting in
      vain for the dawn.”
    

      “Yes, I am Socrates, my friend, and you, are you not Elpidias who
      died three days before me?”
    

      “Yes, I am Elpidias, formerly the richest tanner in Athens, now the
      most miserable of slaves. For the first time I understand the words of the
      poet: ‘Better to be a slave in this world than a ruler in gloomy
      Hades.’”
    

      “My friend, if it is disagreeable for you where you are, why don’t
      you move to another spot?”
    

      “O Socrates, I marvel at you—how dare you wander about in this
      cheerless gloom? I—I sit here overcome with grief and bemoan the
      joys of a fleeting life.”
    

      “Friend Elpidias, like you, I, too, was plunged in this gloom when
      the light of earthly life was removed from my eyes. But an inner voice
      told me: ‘Tread this new path without hesitation’, and I went.”
    

      “But whither do you go, O son of Sophroniscus? Here there is no way,
      no path, not even a ray of light; nothing but a chaos of rocks, mist, and
      gloom.”
    

      “True. But, my Elpidias, since you are aware of this sad truth, have
      you not asked yourself what is the most distressing thing in your present
      situation?”
    

      “Undoubtedly the dismal darkness.”
    

      “Then one should seek for light. Perchance you will find here the
      great law—that mortals must in darkness seek the source of life. Do
      you not think it is better so to seek than to remain sitting in one spot?
      I think it is, therefore I keep walking. Farewell!”
    

      “Oh, good Socrates, abandon me not! You go with sure steps through
      the pathless chaos in Hades. Hold out to me but a fold of your mantle—”
    

      “If you think it is better for you, too, then follow me, friend
      Elpidias.”
    

      And the two shades walked on, while the soul of Ctesippus, released by
      sleep from its mortal envelop, flew after them, greedily absorbing the
      tones of the clear Socratic speech.
    

      “Are you here, good Socrates?” the voice of the Athenian again
      was heard. “Why are you silent? Converse shortens the way, and I
      swear, by Hercules, never did I have to traverse such a horrid way.”
    

      “Put questions, friend Elpidias! The question of one who seeks
      knowledge brings forth answers and produces conversation.”
    

      Elpidias maintained silence for a moment, and then, after he had collected
      his thoughts, asked:
    

      “Yes, this is what I wanted to say—tell me, my poor Socrates,
      did they at least give you a good burial?”
    

      “I must confess, friend Elpidias, I cannot satisfy your curiosity.”
    

      “I understand, my poor Socrates, it doesn’t help you cut a
      figure. Now with me it was so different! Oh, how they buried me, how
      magnificently they buried me, my poor fellow-Wanderer! I still think with
      great pleasure of those lovely moments after my death. First they washed
      me and sprinkled me with well-smelling balsam. Then my faithful Larissa
      dressed me in garments of the finest weave. The best mourning-women of the
      city tore their hair from their heads because they had been promised good
      pay, and in the family vault they placed an amphora—a crater with
      beautiful, decorated handles of bronze, and, besides, a vial.—”
    

      “Stay, friend Elpidias. I am convinced that the faithful Larissa
      converted her love into several minas. Yet—”
    

      “Exactly ten minas and four drachmas, not counting the drinks for
      the guests. I hardly think that the richest tanner can come before the
      souls of his ancestors and boast of such respect on the part of the
      living.”
    

      “Friend Elpidias, don’t you think that money would have been
      of more use to the poor people who are still alive in Athens than to you
      at this moment?”
    

      “Admit, Socrates, you are speaking in envy,” responded
      Elpidias, pained. “I am sorry for you, unfortunate Socrates,
      although, between ourselves, you really deserved your fate. I myself in
      the family circle said more than once that an end ought to be put to your
      impious doings, because—”
    

      “Stay, friend, I thought you wanted to draw a conclusion, and I fear
      you are straying from the straight path. Tell me, my good friend, whither
      does your wavering thought tend?”
    

      “I wanted to say that in my goodness I am sorry for you. A month ago
      I myself spoke against you in the assembly, but truly none of us who
      shouted so loud wanted such a great ill to befall you. Believe me, now I
      am all the sorrier for you, unhappy philosopher!”
    

      “I thank you. But tell me, my friend, do you perceive a brightness
      before your eyes?”
    

      “No, on the contrary such darkness lies before me that I must ask
      myself whether this is not the misty region of Orcus.”
    

      “This way, therefore, is just as dark for you as for me?”
    

      “Quite right.”
    

      “If I am not mistaken, you are even holding on to the folds of my
      cloak?”
    

      “Also true.”
    

      “Then we are in the same position? You see your ancestors are not
      hastening to rejoice in the tale of your pompous burial. Where is the
      difference between us, my good friend?”
    

      “But, Socrates, have the gods enveloped your reason in such
      obscurity that the difference is not clear to you?”
    

      “Friend, if your situation is clearer to you, then give me your hand
      and lead me, for I swear, by the dog, you let me go ahead in this
      darkness.”
    

      “Cease your scoffing, Socrates! Do not make sport, and do not
      compare yourself, your godless self, with a man who died in his own bed——“.
    

      “Ah, I believe I am beginning to understand you. But tell me,
      Elpidias, do you hope ever again to rejoice in your bed?”
    

      “Oh, I think not.”
    

      “And was there ever a time when you did not sleep in it?”
    

      “Yes. That was before I bought goods from Agesilaus at half their
      value. You see, that Agesilaus is really a deep-dyed rogue——”
    

      “Ah, never mind about Agesilaus! Perhaps he is getting them back,
      from your widow at a quarter their value. Then wasn’t I right when I
      said that you were in possession of your bed only part of the time?”
    

      “Yes, you were right.”
    

      “Well, and I, too, was in possession of the bed in which I died part
      of the time. Proteus, the good guard of the prison, lent it to me for a
      period.”
    

      “Oh, if I had known what you were aiming at with your talk, I wouldn’t
      have answered your wily questions. By Hercules, such profanation is
      unheard of—he compares himself with me! Why, I could put an end to
      you with two words, if it came to it——”
    

      “Say them, Elpidias, without fear. Words can scarcely be more
      destructive to me than the hemlock.”
    

      “Well, then, that is just what I wanted to say. You unfortunate man,
      you died by the sentence of the court and had to drink hemlock!”
    

      “But I have known that since the day of my death, even long before.
      And you, unfortunate Elpidias, tell me what caused your death?”
    

      “Oh, with me, it was different, entirely different! You see I got
      the dropsy in my abdomen. An expensive physician from Corinth was called
      who promised to cure me for two minas, and he was given half that amount
      in advance. I am afraid that Larissa in her lack of experience in such
      things gave him the other half, too——”
    

      “Then the physician did not keep his promise?”
    

      “That’s it.”
    

      “And you died from dropsy?”
    

      “Ah, Socrates, believe me, three times it wanted to vanquish me, and
      finally it quenched the flame of my life!”
    

      “Then tell me—did death by dropsy give you great pleasure?”
    

      “Oh, wicked Socrates, don’t make sport of me. I told you it
      wanted to vanquish me three times. I bellowed like a steer under the knife
      of the slaughterer, and begged the ParcÃ¦ to cut the thread of my life as
      quickly as possible.”
    

      “That doesn’t surprise me. But from what do you conclude that
      the dropsy was pleasanter to you than the hemlock to me? The hemlock made
      an end of me in a moment.”
    

      “I see, I fell into your snare again, you crafty sinner! I won’t
      enrage the gods still more by speaking with you, you destroyer of sacred
      customs.”
    

      Both were silent, and quiet reigned. But in a short while Elpidias was
      again the first to begin a conversation.
    

      “Why are you silent, good Socrates?”
    

      “My friend; didn’t you yourself ask for silence?”
    

      “I am not proud, and I can treat men who are worse than I am
      considerately. Don’t let us quarrel.”
    

      “I did not quarrel with you, friend Elpidias, and did not wish to
      say anything to insult you. I am merely accustomed to get at the truth of
      things by comparisons. My situation is not clear to me. You consider your
      situation better, and I should be glad to learn why. On the other hand, it
      would not hurt you to learn the truth, whatever shape it may take.”
    

      “Well, no more of this.”
    

      “Tell me, are you afraid? I don’t think that the feeling I now
      have can be called fear.”
    

      “I am afraid, although I have less cause than you to be at odds with
      the gods. But don’t you think that the gods, in abandoning us to
      ourselves here in this chaos, have cheated us of our hopes?”
    

      “That depends upon what sort of hopes they were. What did you expect
      from the gods, Elpidias?”
    

      “Well, well, what did I expect from the gods! What curious questions
      you ask, Socrates! If a man throughout life brings offerings, and at his
      death passes away with a pious heart and with all that custom demands, the
      gods might at least send some one to meet him, at least one of the
      inferior gods, to show a man the way. ... But that reminds me. Many a time
      when I begged for good luck in traffic in hides, I promised Hermes calves——”
    

      “And you didn’t have luck?”
    

      “Oh, yes, I had luck, good Socrates, but——“.
    

      “I understand, you had no calf.”
    

      “Bah! Socrates, a rich tanner and not have calves?”
    

      “Now I understand. You had luck, had calves, but you kept them for
      yourself, and Hermes received nothing.”
    

      “You’re a clever man. I’ve often said so. I kept only
      three of my ten oaths, and I didn’t deal differently with the other
      gods. If the same is the case with you, isn’t that the reason,
      possibly, why we are now abandoned by the gods? To be sure, I ordered
      Larissa to sacrifice a whole hecatomb after my death.”
    

      “But that is Larissa’s affair, whereas it was you, friend
      Elpidias, who made the promises.”
    

      “That’s true, that’s true. But you, good Socrates, could
      you, godless as you are, deal better with the gods than I who was a
      god-fearing tanner?”
    

      “My friend, I know not whether I dealt better or worse. At first I
      brought offerings without having made vows. Later I offered neither calves
      nor vows.”
    

      “What, not a single calf, you unfortunate man?”
    

      “Yes, friend, if Hermes had had to live by my gifts, I am afraid he
      would have grown very thin.”
    

      “I understand. You did not traffic in cattle, so you offered
      articles of some other trade—probably a mina or so of what the
      pupils paid you.”
    

      “You know, my friend, I didn’t ask pay of my pupils, and my
      trade scarcely sufficed to support me. If the gods reckoned on the sorry
      remnants of my meals they miscalculated.”
    

      “Oh, blasphemer, in comparison with you I can be proud of my piety.
      Ye gods, look upon this man! I did deceive you at times, but now and then
      I shared with you the surplus of some fortunate deal. He who gives at all
      gives much in comparison with a blasphemer who gives nothing. Socrates, I
      think you had better go on alone! I fear that your company, godless one,
      damages me in the eyes of the gods.”
    

      “As you will, good Elpidias. I swear by the dog no one shall force
      his company on another. Unhand the fold of my mantle, and farewell. I will
      go on alone.”
    

      And Socrates walked forward with a sure tread, feeling the ground,
      however, at every step.
    

      But Elpidias behind him instantly cried out:
    

      “Wait, wait, my good fellow-citizen, do not leave an Athenian alone
      in this horrible place! I was only making fun. Take what I said as a joke,
      and don’t go so quickly. I marvel how you can see a thing in this
      hellish darkness.”
    

      “Friend, I have accustomed my eyes to it.”
    

      “That’s good. Still I, can’t approve of your not having
      brought sacrifices to the gods. No, I can’t, poor Socrates, I can’t.
      The honourable Sophroniscus certainly taught you better in your youth, and
      you yourself used to take part in the prayers. I saw you.”
    

      “Yes. But I am accustomed to examine all our motives and to accept
      only those that after investigation prove to be reasonable. And so a day
      came on which I said to myself: ‘Socrates, here you are praying to
      the Olympians. Why are you praying to them?’”
    

      Elpidias laughed.
    

      “Really you philosophers sometimes don’t know how to answer
      the simplest questions. I’m a plain tanner who never in my life
      studied sophistry, yet I know why I must honour the Olympians.”
    

      “Tell me quickly, so that I, too, may know why.”
    

      “Why? Ha! Ha! It’s too simple, you wise Socrates.”
    

      “So much the better if it’s simple. But don’t keep your
      wisdom from me. Tell me—why must one honour the gods?”
    

      “Why. Because everybody does it.”
    

      “Friend, you know very well that not every one honours the gods.
      Wouldn’t it be more correct to say ‘many’?”
    

      “Very well, many.”
    

      “But tell me, don’t more men deal wickedly than righteously?”
    

      “I think so. You find more wicked people than good people.”
    

      “Therefore, if you follow the majority, you ought to deal wickedly
      and not righteously?”
    

      “What are you saying?”
    

      “I’m not saying it, you are. But I think the
      reason that men reverence the Olympians is not because the majority
      worship them. We must find another, more rational ground. Perhaps you mean
      they deserve reverence?”
    

      “Yes, very right.”
    

      “Good. But then arises a new question: Why do they deserve
      reverence?”
    

      “Because of their greatness.”
    

      “Ah, that’s more like it. Perhaps I will soon be agreeing with
      you. It only remains for you to tell me wherein their greatness consists.
      That’s a difficult question, isn’t it? Let us seek the answer
      together. Homer says that the impetuous Ares, when stretched flat on the
      ground by a stone thrown by Pallas Athene, covered with his body the space
      that can be travelled in seven mornings. You see what an enormous space.”
    

      “Is that wherein greatness consists?”
    

      “There you have me, my friend. That raises another question. Do you
      remember the athlete Theophantes? He towered over the people a whole head’s
      length, whereas Pericles was no larger than you. But whom do we call
      great, Pericles or Theophantes?”
    

      “I see that greatness does not consist in size of body. In that you’re
      right. I am glad we agree. Perhaps greatness consists in virtue?”
    

      “Certainly.”
    

      “I think so, too.”
    

      “Well, then, who must bow to whom? The small before the large, or
      those who are great in virtues before the wicked?”
    

      “The answer is clear.”
    

      “I think so, too. Now we will look further into this matter. Tell me
      truly, did you ever kill other people’s children with arrows?”
    

      “It goes without saying, never! Do you think so ill of me?”
    

      “Nor have you, I trust, ever seduced the wives of other men?”
    

      “I was an upright tanner and a good husband. Don’t forget
      that, Socrates, I beg of you!”
    

      “You never became a brute, nor by your lustfulness gave your
      faithful Larissa occasion to revenge herself on women whom you had ruined
      and on their innocent children?”
    

      “You anger me, really, Socrates.”
    

      “But perhaps you snatched your inheritance from your father and
      threw him into prison?”
    

      “Never! Why these insulting questions?”
    

      “Wait, my friend. Perhaps we will both reach a conclusion. Tell me,
      would you have considered a man great who had done all these things of
      which I have spoken?”
    

      “No, no, no! I should have called such a man a scoundrel, and lodged
      public complaint against him with the judges in the market-place.”
    

      “Well, Elpidias, why did you not complain in the market-place
      against Zeus and the Olympians? The son of Cronos carried on war with his
      own father, and was seized with brutal lust for the daughters of men,
      while Hera took vengeance upon innocent virgins. Did not both of them
      convert the unhappy daughter of Inachos into a common cow? Did not Apollo
      kill all the children of Niobe with his arrows? Did not Callenius steal
      bulls? Well, then, Elpidias, if it is true that he who has less virtue
      must do honour to him who has more, then you should not build altars to
      the Olympians, but they to you.”
    

      “Blaspheme not, impious Socrates! Keep quiet! How dare you judge the
      acts of the gods?”
    

      “Friend, a higher power has judged them. Let us investigate the
      question. What is the mark of divinity? I think you said, Greatness, which
      consists in virtue. Now is not this greatness the one divine spark in man?
      But if we test the greatness of the gods by our small human virtues, and
      it turns out that that which measures is greater than that which is
      measured, then it follows that the divine principle itself condemns the
      Olympians. But, then—”
    

      “What, then?”
    

      “Then, friend Elpidias, they are no gods, but deceptive phantoms,
      creations of a dream. Is it not so?”
    

      “Ah, that’s whither your talk leads, you bare-footed
      philosopher! Now I see what they said of you is true. You are like that
      fish that takes men captive with its look. So you took me captive in order
      to confound my believing soul and awaken doubt in it. It was already
      beginning to waver in its reverence for Zeus. Speak alone. I won’t
      answer any more.”
    

      “Be not wrathful, Elpidias! I don’t wish to inflict any evil
      upon you. But if you are tired of following my arguments to their logical
      conclusions, permit me to relate to you an allegory of a Milesian youth.
      Allegories rest the mind, and the relaxation is not unprofitable.”
    

      “Speak, if your story is not too long and its purpose is good.”
    

      “Its purpose is truth, friend Elpidias, and I will be brief. Once,
      you know, in ancient times, Miletus was exposed to the attacks of the
      barbarians. Among the youth who were seized was a son of the wisest and
      best of all the citizens in the land. His precious child was overtaken by
      a severe illness and became unconscious. He was abandoned and allowed to
      lie like worthless booty. In the dead of night he came to his senses. High
      above him glimmered the stars. Round about stretched the desert; and in
      the distance he heard the howl of beasts of prey. He was alone.
    

      “He was entirely alone, and, besides that, the gods had taken from
      him the recollection of his former life. In vain he racked his brain—it
      was as dark and empty as the inhospitable desert in which he found
      himself. But somewhere, far away, behind the misty and obscure figures
      conjured up by his reason, loomed the thought of his lost home, and a
      vague realisation of the figure of the best of all men; and in his heart
      resounded the word ‘father.’ Doesn’t it seem to you that
      the fate of this youth resembles the fate of all humanity?”
    

      “How so?”
    

      “Do we not all awake to life on earth with a hazy recollection of
      another home? And does not the figure of the great unknown hover before
      our souls?”
    

      “Continue, Socrates, I am listening.”
    

      “The youth revived, arose, and walked cautiously, seeking to avoid
      all dangers. When after long wanderings his strength was nearly gone, he
      discerned a fire in the misty distance which illumined the darkness and
      banished the cold. A faint hope crept into his weary soul, and the
      recollections of his father’s house again awoke within him. The
      youth walked toward the light, and cried: ‘It is you, my father, it
      is you!’
    

      “And was it his father’s house?”
    

      “No, it was merely a night lodging of wild nomads. So for many years
      he led the miserable life of a captive slave, and only in his dreams saw
      the distant home and rested on his father’s bosom. Sometimes with
      weak hand he endeavoured to lure from dead clay or wood or stone the face
      and form that ever hovered before him. There even came moments when he
      grew weary and embraced his own handiwork and prayed to it and wet it with
      his tears. But the stone remained cold stone. And as he waxed in years the
      youth destroyed his creations, which already seemed to him a vile
      defamation of his ever-present dreams. At last fate brought him to a good
      barbarian, who asked him for the cause of his constant mourning. When the
      youth, confided to him the hopes and longings of his soul, the barbarian,
      a wise man, said:
    

      “‘The world would be better did such a man and such a country
      exist as that of which you speak. But by what mark would you recognise
      your father?’
    

      “‘In my country,’ answered the youth, ‘they
      reverenced wisdom and virtue and looked up to my father as to the master.’
    

      “‘Well and good,’ answered the barbarian. ‘I must
      assume that a kernel of your father’s teaching resides in you.
      Therefore take up the wanderer’s staff, and proceed on your way.
      Seek perfect wisdom and truth, and when you have found them, cast aside
      your staff—there will be your home and your father.’
    

      “And the youth went on his way at break of day—”
    

      “Did he find the one whom he sought?”
    

      “He is still seeking. Many countries, cities and men has he seen. He
      has come to know all the ways by land; he has traversed the stormy seas;
      he has searched the courses of the stars in heaven by which a pilgrim can
      direct his course in the limitless deserts. And each time that on his
      wearisome way an inviting fire lighted up the darkness before his eyes,
      his heart beat faster and hope crept into his soul. 'That is my father’s
      hospitable house,’ he thought.
    

      “And when a hospitable host would greet the tired traveller and
      offer him the peace and blessing of his hearth, the youth would fall at
      his feet and say with emotion: ‘I thank you, my father! Do you not
      recognise your son?’
    

      “And many were prepared to take him as their son, for at that time
      children were frequently kidnapped. But after the first glow of
      enthusiasm, the youth would detect traces of imperfection, sometimes even
      of wickedness. Then he would begin to investigate and to test his host
      with questions concerning justice and injustice. And soon he would be
      driven forth again upon the cold wearisome way. More than once he said to
      himself: ‘I will remain at this last hearth, I will preserve my last
      belief. It shall be the home of my father.’”
    

      “Do you know, Socrates, perhaps that would have been the most
      sensible thing to do.”
    

      “So he thought sometimes. But the habit of investigating, the
      confused dream of a father, gave him no peace. Again and again he shook
      the dust from his feet; again and again he grasped his staff. Not a few
      stormy nights found him shelterless. Doesn’t it seem to you that the
      fate of this youth resembles the fate of mankind?”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Does not the race of man make trial of its childish belief and
      doubt it while seeking the unknown? Doesn’t it fashion the form of
      its father in wood, stone, custom, and tradition? And then man finds the
      form imperfect, destroys it, and again goes on his wanderings in the
      desert of doubt. Always for the purpose of seeking something better—”
    

      “Oh, you cunning sage, now I understand the purpose of your
      allegory! And I will tell you to your face that if only a ray of light
      were to penetrate this gloom, I would not put the Lord on trial with
      unnecessary questions—”
    

      “Friend, the light is already shining,” answered Socrates.
    

      V
    

It seemed as if the
      words of the philosopher had taken effect. High up in the distance a beam
      of light penetrated a vapoury envelop and disappeared in the mountains. It
      was followed by a second and a third. There beyond the darkness luminous
      genii seemed to be hovering, and a great mystery seemed about to be
      revealed, as if the breath of life were blowing, as if some great ceremony
      were in process. But it was still very remote. The shades descended
      thicker and thicker; foggy clouds rolled into masses, separated, and
      chased one another endlessly, ceaselessly.
    

      A blue light from a distant peak fell upon a deep ravine; the clouds rose
      and covered the heavens to the zenith.
    

      The rays disappeared and withdrew to a greater and greater distance, as if
      fleeing from this vale of shades and horrors. Socrates stood and looked
      after them sadly. Elpidias peered up at the peak full of dread.
    

      “Look, Socrates! What do you see there on the mountain?”
    

      “Friend,” answered; the philosopher, “let us investigate
      our situation. Since we are in motion, we must arrive somewhere, and since
      earthly existence must have a limit, I believe that this limit is to be
      found at the parting of two beginnings. In the struggle of light with
      darkness we attain the crown of our endeavours. Since the ability to think
      has not been taken from us, I believe that it is the will of the divine
      being who called our power of thinking into existence that we should
      investigate the goal of our endeavours ourselves. Therefore, Elpidias, let
      us in dignified manner go to meet the dawn that lies beyond those clouds.”
    

      “Oh, my friend! If that is the dawn, I would rather the long
      cheerless night had endured forever, for it was quiet and peaceful. Don’t
      you think our time passed tolerably well in instructive converse? And now
      my soul trembles before the tempest drawing nigh. Say what you will, but
      there before us are no ordinary shades of the dead night.”
    

      Zeus hurled a bolt into the bottomless gulf.
    

      Ctesippus looked up to the peak, and his soul was frozen with horror. Huge
      sombre figures of the Olympian gods crowded on the mountain in a circle. A
      last ray shot through the region of clouds and mists, and died away like a
      faint memory. A storm was approaching now, and the powers of night were
      once more in the ascendant. Dark figures covered the heavens. In the
      centre Ctesippus could discern the all-powerful son of Cronos surrounded
      by a halo. The sombre figures of the older gods encircled him in wrathful
      excitement. Like flocks of birds winging their way in the twilight, like
      eddies of dust driven by a hurricane, like autumn leaves lashed by Boreas,
      numerous minor gods hovered in long clouds and occupied the spaces.
    

      When the clouds gradually lifted from the peak and sent down dismal horror
      to embrace the earth, Ctesippus fell upon his knees. Later, he admitted
      that in this dreadful moment he forgot all his master’s deductions
      and conclusions. His courage failed him; and terror took possession of his
      soul.
    

      He merely listened.
    

      Two voices resounded there where before had been silence, the one the
      mighty and threatening voice of the Godhead, the other the weak voice of a
      mortal which the wind carried from the mountain slope to the spot where
      Ctesippus had left Socrates.
    

      “Are you,” thus spake the voice from the clouds, “are
      you the blasphemous Socrates who strives with the gods of heaven and
      earth? Once there were none so joyous, so immortal, as we. Now, for long
      we have passed our days in darkness because of the unbelief and doubt that
      have come upon earth. Never has the mist closed in on us so heavily as
      since the time your voice resounded in Athens, the city we once so dearly
      loved. Why did you not follow the commands of your father, Sophroniscus?
      The good man permitted himself a few little sins, especially in his youth,
      yet by way of recompense, we frequently enjoyed the smell of his offerings—”
    

      “Stay, son of Cronos, and solve my doubts! Do I understand that you
      prefer cowardly hypocrisy to searchings for the truth?”
    

      At this question the crags trembled with the shock of a thundering peal.
      The first breath of the tempest scattered in the distant gorges. But the
      mountains still trembled, for he who was enthroned upon them still
      trembled. And in the anxious quiet of the night only distant sighs could
      be heard.
    

      In the very bowels of the earth the chained Titans seemed to be groaning
      under the blow of the son of Cronos.
    

      “Where are you now, you impious questioner?” suddenly came the
      mocking voice of the Olympian.
    

      “I am here, son of Cronos, on the same spot. Nothing but your answer
      can move me from it. I am waiting.”
    

      Thunder bellowed in the clouds like a wild animal amazed at the daring of
      a Lybian tamer’s fearless approach. At the end of a few moments the
      Voice again rolled over the spaces:
    

      “Son of Sophroniscus! Is it not enough that you bred so much
      scepticism on earth that the clouds of your doubt reached even to Olympus?
      Indeed, many a time when you were carrying on your discourse in the
      market-places or in the academies or on the promenades, it seemed to me as
      if you had already destroyed all the altars on earth, and the dust were
      rising from them up to us here on the mountain. Even that is not enough!
      Here before my very face you will not recognise the power of the immortals—”
    

      “Zeus, thou art wrathful. Tell me, who gave me the ‘Daemon’
      which spoke to my soul throughout my life and forced me to seek the truth
      without resting?”
    

      Mysterious silence reigned in the clouds.
    

      “Was it not you? You are silent? Then I will investigate the matter.
      Either this divine beginning emanates from you or from some one else. If
      from you, I bring it to you as an offering. I offer you the ripe fruit of
      my life, the flame of the spark of your own kindling! See, son of Cronos,
      I preserved my gift; in my deepest heart grew the seed that you sowed. It
      is the very fire of my soul. It burned in those crises when with my own
      hand I tore the thread of life. Why will you not accept it? Would you have
      me regard you as a poor master whose age prevents him from seeing that his
      own pupil obediently follows out his commands? Who are you that would
      command me to stifle the flame that has illuminated my whole life, ever
      since it was penetrated by the first ray of sacred thought? The sun says
      not to the stars: ‘Be extinguished that I may rise.’ The sun
      rises and the weak glimmer of the stars is quenched by its far, far
      stronger light. The day says not to the torch: ‘Be extinguished; you
      interfere with me.’ The day breaks, and the torch smokes, but no
      longer shines. The divinity that I am questing is not you who are afraid
      of doubt. That divinity is like the day, like the sun, and shines without
      extinguishing other lights. The god I seek is the god who would say to me:
      ‘Wanderer, give me your torch, you no longer need it, for I am the
      source of all light. Searcher for truth, set upon my altar the little gift
      of your doubt, because in me is its solution.’ If you are that god,
      harken to my questions. No one kills his own child, and my doubts are a
      branch of the eternal spirit whose name is truth.”
    

      Round about, the fires of heaven tore the dark clouds, and out of the
      howling storm again resounded the powerful voice:
    

      “Whither did your doubts tend, you arrogant sage, who renounce
      humility, the most beautiful adornment of earthly virtues? You abandoned
      the friendly shelter of credulous simplicity to wander in the desert of
      doubt. You have seen this dead space from which the living gods have
      departed. Will you traverse it, you insignificant worm, who crawl in the
      dust of your pitiful profanation of the gods? Will you vivify the world?
      Will you conceive the unknown divinity to whom you do not dare to pray?
      You miserable digger of dung, soiled by the smut of ruined altars, are you
      perchance the architect who shall build the new temple? Upon what do you
      base your hopes, you who disavow the old gods and have no new gods to take
      their place? The eternal night of doubts unsolved, the dead desert,
      deprived of the living spirit—this is your world, you pitiful
      worm, who gnawed at the living belief which was a refuge for simple
      hearts, who converted the world into a dead chaos. Now, then, where are
      you, you insignificant, blasphemous sage?”
    

      Nothing was heard but the mighty storm roaring through the spaces. Then
      the thunder died away, the wind folded its pinions, and torrents of rain
      streamed through the darkness, like incessant floods of tears which
      threatened to devour the earth and drown it in a deluge of unquenchable
      grief.
    

      It seemed to Ctesippus that the master was overcome, and that the
      fearless, restless, questioning voice had been silenced forever. But a few
      moments later it issued again from the same spot.
    

      “Your words, son of Cronos, hit the mark better than your
      thunderbolts. The thoughts you have cast into my terrified soul have
      haunted me often, and it has sometimes seemed as if my heart would break
      under the burden of their unendurable anguish. Yes, I abandoned the
      friendly shelter of credulous simplicity. Yes, I have seen the spaces from
      which the living gods have departed enveloped in the night of eternal
      doubt. But I walked without fear, for my ‘Daemon’ lighted the
      way, the divine beginning of all life. Let us investigate the question.
      Are not offerings of incense burnt on your altars in the name of Him who
      gives life? You are stealing what belongs to another! Not you, but that
      other, is served by credulous simplicity. Yes, you are right, I am no
      architect. I am not the builder of a new temple. Not to me was it given to
      raise from the earth to the heavens the glorious structure of the coming
      faith. I am one who digs dung, soiled by the smut of destruction. But my
      conscience tells me, son of Cronos, that the work of one who digs dung is
      also necessary for the future temple. When the time comes for the proud
      and stately edifice to stand on the purified place, and for the living
      divinity of the new belief to erect his throne upon it, I, the modest
      digger of dung, will go to him and say: ‘Here am I who restlessly
      crawled in the dust of disavowal. When surrounded by fog and soot, I had
      no time to raise my eyes from the ground; my head had only a vague
      conception of the future building. Will you reject me, you just one, Just,
      and True, and Great?’”
    

      Silence and astonishment reigned in the spaces. Then Socrates raised his
      voice, and continued:
    

      “The sunbeam falls upon the filthy puddle, and light vapour, leaving
      heavy mud behind, rises to the sun, melts, and dissolves in the ether.
      With your sunbeam you touched my dust-laden soul and it aspired to you,
      Unknown One, whose name is mystery! I sought for you, because you are
      Truth; I strove to attain to you, because you are Justice; I loved you,
      because you are Love; I died for you, because you are the Source of Life.
      Will you reject me, O Unknown? My torturing doubts, my passionate search
      for truth, my difficult life, my voluntary death—accept them as a
      bloodless offering, as a prayer, as a sigh! Absorb them as the
      immeasurable ether absorbs the evaporating mists! Take them, you whose
      name I do not know, let not the ghosts of the night I have traversed bar
      the way to you, to eternal light! Give way, you shades who dim the light
      of the dawn! I tell you, gods of my people, you are unjust, and where
      there is no justice there can be no truth, but only phantoms, creations of
      a dream. To this conclusion have I come, I, Socrates, who sought to fathom
      all things. Rise, dead mists, I go my way to Him whom I have sought all my
      life long!”
    

      The thunder burst again—a short, abrupt peal, as if the egis had
      fallen from the weakened hand of the thunderer. Storm-voices trembled from
      the mountains, sounding dully in the gorges, and died away in the clefts.
      In their place resounded other, marvellous tones.
    

      When Ctesippus looked up in astonishment, a spectacle presented itself
      such as no mortal eyes had ever seen.
    

      The night vanished. The clouds lifted, and godly figures floated in the
      azure like golden ornaments on the hem of a festive robe. Heroic forms
      glimmered over the remote crags and ravines, and Elpidias, whose little
      figure was seen standing at the edge of a cleft in the rocks, stretched
      his hands toward them, as if beseeching the vanishing gods for a solution
      of his fate.
    

      A mountain-peak now stood out clearly above the mysterious mist, gleaming
      like a torch over dark blue valleys. The son of Cronos, the thunderer, was
      no longer enthroned upon it, and the other Olympians too were gone.
    

      Socrates stood alone in the light of the sun under the high heavens.
    

      Ctesippus was distinctly conscious of the pulse-beat of a mysterious life
      quivering throughout nature, stirring even the tiniest blade of grass.
    

      A breath seemed to be stirring the balmy air, a voice to be sounding in
      wonderful harmony, an invisible tread to be heard—the tread of the
      radiant Dawn!
    

      And on the illumined peak a man still stood, stretching out his arms in
      mute ecstasy, moved by a mighty impulse.
    

      A moment, and all disappeared, and the light of an ordinary day shone upon
      the awakened soul of Ctesippus. It was like dismal twilight after the
      revelation of nature that had blown upon him the breath of an unknown
      life.
    








      In deep silence the pupils of the philosopher listened to the marvellous
      recital of Ctesippus. Plato broke the silence.
    

      “Let us investigate the dream and its significance,” he said.
    

      “Let us investigate it,” responded the others.
    











      THE SIGNAL
    

      BY VSEVOLOD M. GARSHIN.
    

Semyon Ivanov was a
      track-walker. His hut was ten versts away from a railroad station in one
      direction and twelve versts away in the other. About four versts away
      there was a cotton mill that had opened the year before, and its tall
      chimney rose up darkly from behind the forest. The only dwellings around
      were the distant huts of the other track-walkers.
    

      Semyon Ivanov’s health had been completely shattered. Nine years
      before he had served right through the war as servant to an officer. The
      sun had roasted him, the cold frozen him, and hunger famished him on the
      forced marches of forty and fifty versts a day in the heat and the cold
      and the rain and the shine. The bullets had whizzed about him, but, thank
      God! none had struck him.
    

      Semyon’s regiment had once been on the firing line. For a whole week
      there had been skirmishing with the Turks, only a deep ravine separating
      the two hostile armies; and from morn till eve there had been a steady
      cross-fire. Thrice daily Semyon carried a steaming samovar and his officer’s
      meals from the camp kitchen to the ravine. The bullets hummed about him
      and rattled viciously against the rocks. Semyon was terrified and cried
      sometimes, but still he kept right on. The officers were pleased with him,
      because he always had hot tea ready for them.
    

      He returned from the campaign with limbs unbroken but crippled with
      rheumatism. He had experienced no little sorrow since then. He arrived
      home to find that his father, an old man, and his little four-year-old son
      had died. Semyon remained alone with his wife. They could not do much. It
      was difficult to plough with rheumatic arms and legs. They could no longer
      stay in their village, so they started off to seek their fortune in new
      places. They stayed for a short time on the line, in Kherson and
      Donshchina, but nowhere found luck. Then the wife went out to service, and
      Semyon continued to travel about. Once he happened to ride on an engine,
      and at one of the stations the face of the station-master seemed familiar
      to him. Semyon looked at the station-master and the station-master looked
      at Semyon, and they recognised each other. He had been an officer in
      Semyon’s regiment.
    

      “You are Ivanov?” he said.
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      “How do you come to be here?”
    

      Semyon told him all.
    

      “Where are you off to?”
    

      “I cannot tell you, sir.”
    

      “Idiot! What do you mean by ‘cannot tell you?’”
    

      “I mean what I say, your Excellency. There is nowhere for me to go
      to. I must hunt for work, sir.”
    

      The station-master looked at him, thought a bit, and said: “See
      here, friend, stay here a while at the station. You are married, I think.
      Where is your wife?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency, I am married. My wife is at Kursk, in service
      with a merchant.”
    

      “Well, write to your wife to come here. I will give you a free pass
      for her. There is a position as track-walker open. I will speak to the
      Chief on your behalf.”
    

      “I shall be very grateful to you, your Excellency,” replied
      Semyon.
    

      He stayed at the station, helped in the kitchen, cut firewood, kept the
      yard clean, and swept the platform. In a fortnight’s time his wife
      arrived, and Semyon went on a hand-trolley to his hut. The hut was a new
      one and warm, with as much wood as he wanted. There was a little vegetable
      garden, the legacy of former track-walkers, and there was about half a
      dessiatin of ploughed land on either side of the railway embankment.
      Semyon was rejoiced. He began to think of doing some farming, of
      purchasing a cow and a horse.
    

      He was given all necessary stores—a green flag, a red flag,
      lanterns, a horn, hammer, screw-wrench for the nuts, a crow-bar, spade,
      broom, bolts, and nails; they gave him two books of regulations and a
      time-table of the train. At first Semyon could not sleep at night, and
      learnt the whole time-table by heart. Two hours before a train was due he
      would go over his section, sit on the bench at his hut, and look and
      listen whether the rails were trembling or the rumble of the train could
      be heard. He even learned the regulations by heart, although he could only
      read by spelling out each word.
    

      It was summer; the work was not heavy; there was no snow to clear away,
      and the trains on that line were infrequent. Semyon used to go over his
      verst twice a day, examine and screw up nuts here and there, keep the bed
      level, look at the water-pipes, and then go home to his own affairs. There
      was only one drawback—he always had to get the inspector’s
      permission for the least little thing he wanted to do. Semyon and his wife
      were even beginning to be bored.
    

      Two months passed, and Semyon commenced to make the acquaintance of his
      neighbours, the track-walkers on either side of him. One was a very old
      man, whom the authorities were always meaning to relieve. He scarcely
      moved out of his hut. His wife used to do all his work. The other
      track-walker, nearer the station, was a young man, thin, but muscular. He
      and Semyon met for the first time on the line midway between the huts.
      Semyon took off his hat and bowed. “Good health to you, neighbour,”
      he said.
    

      The neighbour glanced askance at him. “How do you do?” he
      replied; then turned around and made off.
    

      Later the wives met. Semyon’s wife passed the time of day with her
      neighbour, but neither did she say much.
    

      On one occasion Semyon said to her: “Young woman, your husband is
      not very talkative.”
    

      The woman said nothing at first, then replied: “But what is there
      for him to talk about? Every one has his own business. Go your way, and
      God be with you.”
    

      However, after another month or so they became acquainted. Semyon would go
      with Vasily along the line, sit on the edge of a pipe, smoke, and talk of
      life. Vasily, for the most part, kept silent, but Semyon talked of his
      village, and of the campaign through which he had passed.
    

      “I have had no little sorrow in my day,” he would say; “and
      goodness knows I have not lived long. God has not given me happiness, but
      what He may give, so will it be. That’s so, friend Vasily Stepanych.”
    

      Vasily Stepanych knocked the ashes out of his pipe against a rail, stood
      up, and said: “It is not luck which follows us in life, but human
      beings. There is no crueller beast on this earth than man. Wolf does not
      eat wolf, but man will readily devour man.”
    

      “Come, friend, don’t say that; a wolf eats wolf.”
    

      “The words came into my mind and I said it. All the same, there is
      nothing crueller than man. If it were not for his wickedness and greed, it
      would be possible to live. Everybody tries to sting you to the quick, to
      bite and eat you up.”
    

      Semyon pondered a bit. “I don’t know, brother,” he said;
      “perhaps it is as you say, and perhaps it is God’s will.”
    

      “And perhaps,” said Vasily, “it is waste of time for me
      to talk to you. To put everything unpleasant on God, and sit and suffer,
      means, brother, being not a man but an animal. That’s what I have to
      say.” And he turned and went off without saying good-bye.
    

      Semyon also got up. “Neighbour,” he called, “why do you
      lose your temper?” But his neighbour did not look round, and kept on
      his way.
    

      Semyon gazed after him until he was lost to sight in the cutting at the
      turn. He went home and said to his wife: “Arina, our neighbour is a
      wicked person, not a man.”
    

      However, they did not quarrel. They met again and discussed the same
      topics.
    

      “All, mend, if it were not for men we should not be poking in these
      huts,” said Vasily, on one occasion.
    

      “And what if we are poking in these huts? It’s not so bad. You
      can live in them.”
    

      “Live in them, indeed! Bah, you!... You have lived long and learned
      little, looked at much and seen little. What sort of life is there for a
      poor man in a hut here or there? The cannibals are devouring you. They are
      sucking up all your life-blood, and when you become old, they will throw
      you out just as they do husks to feed the pigs on. What pay do you get?”
    

      “Not much, Vasily Stepanych—twelve rubles.”
    

      “And I, thirteen and a half rubles. Why? By the regulations the
      company should give us fifteen rubles a month with firing and lighting.
      Who decides that you should have twelve rubles, or I thirteen and a half?
      Ask yourself! And you say a man can live on that? You understand it is not
      a question of one and a half rubles or three rubles—even if they
      paid us each the whole fifteen rubles. I was at the station last month.
      The director passed through. I saw him. I had that honour. He had a
      separate coach. He came out and stood on the platform... I shall not stay
      here long; I shall go somewhere, anywhere, follow my nose.”
    

      “But where will you go, Stepanych? Leave well enough alone. Here you
      have a house, warmth, a little piece of land. Your wife is a worker.”
    

      “Land! You should look at my piece of land. Not a twig on it—nothing.
      I planted some cabbages in the spring, just when the inspector came along.
      He said: ‘What is this? Why have you not reported this? Why have you
      done this without permission? Dig them up, roots and all.’ He was
      drunk. Another time he would not have said a word, but this time it struck
      him. Three rubles fine!...”
    

      Vasily kept silent for a while, pulling at his pipe, then added quietly:
      “A little more and I should have done for him.”
    

      “You are hot-tempered.”
    

      “No, I am not hot-tempered, but I tell the truth and think. Yes, he
      will still get a bloody nose from me. I will complain to the Chief. We
      will see then!” And Vasily did complain to the Chief.
    

      Once the Chief came to inspect the line. Three days later important
      personages were coming from St. Petersburg and would pass over the line.
      They were conducting an inquiry, so that previous to their journey it was
      necessary to put everything in order. Ballast was laid down, the bed was
      levelled, the sleepers carefully examined, spikes driven in a bit, nuts
      screwed up, posts painted, and orders given for yellow sand to be
      sprinkled at the level crossings. The woman at the neighbouring hut turned
      her old man out to weed. Semyon worked for a whole week. He put everything
      in order, mended his kaftan, cleaned and polished his brass plate until it
      fairly shone. Vasily also worked hard. The Chief arrived on a trolley,
      four men working the handles and the levers making the six wheels hum. The
      trolley travelled at twenty versts an hour, but the wheels squeaked. It
      reached Semyon’s hut, and he ran out and reported in soldierly
      fashion. All appeared to be in repair.
    

      “Have you been here long?” inquired the Chief.
    

      “Since the second of May, your Excellency.”
    

      “All right. Thank you. And who is at hut No. 164?”
    

      The traffic inspector (he was travelling with the Chief on the trolley)
      replied: “Vasily Spiridov.”
    

      “Spiridov, Spiridov... Ah! is he the man against whom you made a
      note last year?”
    

      “He is.”
    

      “Well, we will see Vasily Spiridov. Go on!” The workmen laid
      to the handles, and the trolley got under way. Semyon watched it, and
      thought, “There will be trouble between them and my neighbour.”
    

      About two hours later he started on his round. He saw some one coming
      along the line from the cutting. Something white showed on his head.
      Semyon began to look more attentively. It was Vasily. He had a stick in
      his hand, a small bundle on his shoulder, and his cheek was bound up in a
      handkerchief.
    

      “Where are you off to?” cried Semyon.
    

      Vasily came quite close. He was very pale, white as chalk, and his eyes
      had a wild look. Almost choking, he muttered: “To town—to
      Moscow—to the head office.”
    

      “Head office? Ah, you are going to complain, I suppose. Give it up!
      Vasily Stepanych, forget it.”
    

      “No, mate, I will not forget. It is too late. See! He struck me in
      the face, drew blood. So long as I live I will not forget. I will not
      leave it like this!”
    

      Semyon took his hand. “Give it up, Stepanych. I am giving you good
      advice. You will not better things...”
    

      “Better things! I know myself I shan’t better things. You were
      right about Fate. It would be better for me not to do it, but one must
      stand up for the right.” “But tell me, how did it happen?”
    

      “How? He examined everything, got down from the trolley, looked into
      the hut. I knew beforehand that he would be strict, and so I had put
      everything into proper order. He was just going when I made my complaint.
      He immediately cried out: ‘Here is a Government inquiry coming, and
      you make a complaint about a vegetable garden. Here are privy councillors
      coming, and you annoy me with cabbages!’ I lost patience and said
      something—not very much, but it offended him, and he struck me in
      the face. I stood still; I did nothing, just as if what he did was
      perfectly all right. They went off; I came to myself, washed my face, and
      left.”
    

      “And what about the hut?”
    

      “My wife is staying there. She will look after things. Never mind
      about their roads.”
    

      Vasily got up and collected himself. “Good-bye, Ivanov. I do not
      know whether I shall get any one at the office to listen to me.”
    

      “Surely you are not going to walk?”
    

      “At the station I will try to get on a freight train, and to-morrow
      I shall be in Moscow.”
    

      The neighbours bade each other farewell. Vasily was absent for some time.
      His wife worked for him night and day. She never slept, and wore herself
      out waiting for her husband. On the third day the commission arrived. An
      engine, luggage-van, and two first-class saloons; but Vasily was still
      away. Semyon saw his wife on the fourth day. Her face was swollen from
      crying and her eyes were red.
    

      “Has your husband returned?” he asked. But the woman only made
      a gesture with her hands, and without saying a word went her way.
    

      Semyon had learnt when still a lad to make flutes out of a kind of reed.
      He used to burn out the heart of the stalk, make holes where necessary,
      drill them, fix a mouthpiece at one end, and tune them so well that it was
      possible to play almost any air on them. He made a number of them in his
      spare time, and sent them by his friends amongst the freight brakemen to
      the bazaar in the town. He got two kopeks apiece for them. On the day
      following the visit of the commission he left his wife at home to meet the
      six o’clock train, and started off to the forest to cut some sticks.
      He went to the end of his section—at this point the line made a
      sharp turn—descended the embankment, and struck into the wood at the
      foot of the mountain. About half a verst away there was a big marsh,
      around which splendid reeds for his flutes grew. He cut a whole bundle of
      stalks and started back home. The sun was already dropping low, and in the
      dead stillness only the twittering of the birds was audible, and the
      crackle of the dead wood under his feet. As he walked along rapidly, he
      fancied he heard the clang of iron striking iron, and he redoubled his
      pace. There was no repair going on in his section. What did it mean? He
      emerged from the woods, the railway embankment stood high before him; on
      the top a man was squatting on the bed of the line busily engaged in
      something. Semyon commenced quietly to crawl up towards him. He thought it
      was some one after the nuts which secure the rails. He watched, and the
      man got up, holding a crow-bar in his hand. He had loosened a rail, so
      that it would move to one side. A mist swam before Semyon’s eyes; he
      wanted to cry out, but could not. It was Vasily! Semyon scrambled up the
      bank, as Vasily with crow-bar and wrench slid headlong down the other
      side.
    

      “Vasily Stepanych! My dear friend, come back! Give me the crow-bar.
      We will put the rail back; no one will know. Come back! Save your soul
      from sin!”
    

      Vasily did not look back, but disappeared into the woods.
    

      Semyon stood before the rail which had been torn up. He threw down his
      bundle of sticks. A train was due; not a freight, but a passenger-train.
      And he had nothing with which to stop it, no flag. He could not replace
      the rail and could not drive in the spikes with his bare hands. It was
      necessary to run, absolutely necessary to run to the hut for some tools.
      “God help me!” he murmured.
    

      Semyon started running towards his hut. He was out of breath, but still
      ran, falling every now and then. He had cleared the forest; he was only a
      few hundred feet from his hut, not more, when he heard the distant hooter
      of the factory sound—six o’clock! In two minutes’ time
      No. 7 train was due. “Oh, Lord! Have pity on innocent souls!”
      In his mind Semyon saw the engine strike against the loosened rail with
      its left wheel, shiver, careen, tear up and splinter the sleepers—and
      just there, there was a curve and the embankment seventy feet high, down
      which the engine would topple—and the third-class carriages would be
      packed ... little children... All sitting in the train now, never dreaming
      of danger. “Oh, Lord! Tell me what to do!... No, it is impossible to
      run to the hut and get back in time.”
    

      Semyon did not run on to the hut, but turned back and ran faster than
      before. He was running almost mechanically, blindly; he did not know
      himself what was to happen. He ran as far as the rail which had been
      pulled up; his sticks were lying in a heap. He bent down, seized one
      without knowing why, and ran on farther. It seemed to him the train was
      already coming. He heard the distant whistle; he heard the quiet, even
      tremor of the rails; but his strength was exhausted, he could run no
      farther, and came to a halt about six hundred feet from the awful spot.
      Then an idea came into his head, literally like a ray of light. Pulling
      off his cap, he took out of it a cotton scarf, drew his knife out of the
      upper part of his boot, and crossed himself, muttering, “God bless
      me!”
    

      He buried the knife in his left arm above the elbow; the blood spurted
      out, flowing in a hot stream. In this he soaked his scarf, smoothed it
      out, tied it to the stick and hung out his red flag.
    

      He stood waving his flag. The train was already in sight. The driver would
      not see him—would come close up, and a heavy train cannot be pulled
      up in six hundred feet.
    

      And the blood kept on flowing. Semyon pressed the sides of the wound
      together so as to close it, but the blood did not diminish. Evidently he
      had cut his arm very deep. His head commenced to swim, black spots began
      to dance before his eyes, and then it became dark. There was a ringing in
      his ears. He could not see the train or hear the noise. Only one thought
      possessed him. “I shall not be able to keep standing up. I shall
      fall and drop the flag; the train will pass over me. Help me, oh Lord!”
    

      All turned black before him, his mind became a blank, and he dropped the
      flag; but the blood-stained banner did not fall to the ground. A hand
      seized it and held it high to meet the approaching train. The engineer saw
      it, shut the regulator, and reversed steam. The train came to a
      standstill.
    

      People jumped out of the carriages and collected in a crowd. They saw a
      man lying senseless on the footway, drenched in blood, and another man
      standing beside him with a blood-stained rag on a stick.
    

      Vasily looked around at all. Then, lowering his head, he said: “Bind
      me. I tore up a rail!”
    











      THE DARLING
    

      BY ANTON P. CHEKOV
    

Olenka, the
      daughter of the retired collegiate assessor Plemyanikov, was sitting on
      the back-door steps of her house doing nothing. It was hot, the flies were
      nagging and teasing, and it was pleasant to think that it would soon be
      evening. Dark rain clouds were gathering from the east, wafting a breath
      of moisture every now and then.
    

      Kukin, who roomed in the wing of the same house, was standing in the yard
      looking up at the sky. He was the manager of the Tivoli, an open-air
      theatre.
    

      “Again,” he said despairingly. “Rain again. Rain, rain,
      rain! Every day rain! As though to spite me. I might as well stick my head
      into a noose and be done with it. It’s ruining me. Heavy losses
      every day!” He wrung his hands, and continued, addressing Olenka:
      “What a life, Olga Semyonovna! It’s enough to make a man weep.
      He works, he does his best, his very best, he tortures himself, he passes
      sleepless nights, he thinks and thinks and thinks how to do everything
      just right. And what’s the result? He gives the public the best
      operetta, the very best pantomime, excellent artists. But do they want it?
      Have they the least appreciation of it? The public is rude. The public is
      a great boor. The public wants a circus, a lot of nonsense, a lot of
      stuff. And there’s the weather. Look! Rain almost every evening. It
      began to rain on the tenth of May, and it’s kept it up through the
      whole of June. It’s simply awful. I can’t get any audiences,
      and don’t I have to pay rent? Don’t I have to pay the actors?”
    

      The next day towards evening the clouds gathered again, and Kukin said
      with an hysterical laugh:
    

      “Oh, I don’t care. Let it do its worst. Let it drown the whole
      theatre, and me, too. All right, no luck for me in this world or the next.
      Let the actors bring suit against me and drag me to court. What’s
      the court? Why not Siberia at hard labour, or even the scaffold? Ha, ha,
      ha!”
    

      It was the same on the third day.
    

      Olenka listened to Kukin seriously, in silence. Sometimes tears would rise
      to her eyes. At last Kukin’s misfortune touched her. She fell in
      love with him. He was short, gaunt, with a yellow face, and curly hair
      combed back from his forehead, and a thin tenor voice. His features
      puckered all up when he spoke. Despair was ever inscribed on his face. And
      yet he awakened in Olenka a sincere, deep feeling.
    

      She was always loving somebody. She couldn’t get on without loving
      somebody. She had loved her sick father, who sat the whole time in his
      armchair in a darkened room, breathing heavily. She had loved her aunt,
      who came from Brianska once or twice a year to visit them. And before
      that, when a pupil at the progymnasium, she had loved her French teacher.
      She was a quiet, kind-hearted, compassionate girl, with a soft gentle way
      about her. And she made a very healthy, wholesome impression. Looking at
      her full, rosy cheeks, at her soft white neck with the black mole, and at
      the good naÃ¯ve smile that always played on her face when something
      pleasant was said, the men would think, “Not so bad,” and
      would smile too; and the lady visitors, in the middle of the conversation,
      would suddenly grasp her hand and exclaim, “You darling!” in a
      burst of delight.
    

      The house, hers by inheritance, in which she had lived from birth, was
      located at the outskirts of the city on the Gypsy Road, not far from the
      Tivoli. From early evening till late at night she could hear the music in
      the theatre and the bursting of the rockets; and it seemed to her that
      Kukin was roaring and battling with his fate and taking his chief enemy,
      the indifferent public, by assault. Her heart melted softly, she felt no
      desire to sleep, and when Kukin returned home towards morning, she tapped
      on her window-pane, and through the curtains he saw her face and one
      shoulder and the kind smile she gave him.
    

      He proposed to her, and they were married. And when he had a good look of
      her neck and her full vigorous shoulders, he clapped his hands and said:
    

      “You darling!”
    

      He was happy. But it rained on their wedding-day, and the expression of
      despair never left his face.
    

      They got along well together. She sat in the cashier’s box, kept the
      theatre in order, wrote down the expenses, and paid out the salaries. Her
      rosy cheeks, her kind naÃ¯ve smile, like a halo around her face, could be
      seen at the cashier’s window, behind the scenes, and in the cafÃ©.
      She began to tell her friends that the theatre was the greatest, the most
      important, the most essential thing in the world, that it was the only
      place to obtain true enjoyment in and become humanised and educated.
    

      “But do you suppose the public appreciates it?” she asked.
      “What the public wants is the circus. Yesterday Vanichka and I gave
      Faust Burlesqued, and almost all the boxes were empty. If we had
      given some silly nonsense, I assure you, the theatre would have been
      overcrowded. To-morrow we’ll put Orpheus in Hades on. Do
      come.”
    

      Whatever Kukin said about the theatre and the actors, she repeated. She
      spoke, as he did, with contempt of the public, of its indifference to art,
      of its boorishness. She meddled in the rehearsals, corrected the actors,
      watched the conduct of the musicians; and when an unfavourable criticism
      appeared in the local paper, she wept and went to the editor to argue with
      him.
    

      The actors were fond of her and called her “Vanichka and I”
      and “the darling.” She was sorry for them and lent them small
      sums. When they bilked her, she never complained to her husband; at the
      utmost she shed a few tears.
    

      In winter, too, they got along nicely together. They leased a theatre in
      the town for the whole winter and sublet it for short periods to a Little
      Russian theatrical company, to a conjuror and to the local amateur
      players.
    

      Olenka grew fuller and was always beaming with contentment; while Kukin
      grew thinner and yellower and complained of his terrible losses, though he
      did fairly well the whole winter. At night he coughed, and she gave him
      raspberry syrup and lime water, rubbed him with eau de Cologne, and
      wrapped him up in soft coverings.
    

      “You are my precious sweet,” she said with perfect sincerity,
      stroking his hair. “You are such a dear.”
    

      At Lent he went to Moscow to get his company together, and, while without
      him, Olenka was unable to sleep. She sat at the window the whole time,
      gazing at the stars. She likened herself to the hens that are also uneasy
      and unable to sleep when their rooster is out of the coop. Kukin was
      detained in Moscow. He wrote he would be back during Easter Week, and in
      his letters discussed arrangements already for the Tivoli. But late one
      night, before Easter Monday, there was an ill-omened knocking at the
      wicket-gate. It was like a knocking on a barrel—boom, boom, boom!
      The sleepy cook ran barefooted, plashing through the puddles, to open the
      gate.
    

      “Open the gate, please,” said some one in a hollow bass voice.
      “I have a telegram for you.”
    

      Olenka had received telegrams from her husband before; but this time,
      somehow, she was numbed with terror. She opened the telegram with
      trembling hands and read:
    

      “Ivan Petrovich died suddenly to-day. Awaiting propt orders for
      wuneral Tuesday.”
    

      That was the way the telegram was written—“wuneral”—and
      another unintelligible word—“propt.” The telegram was
      signed by the manager of the opera company.
    

      “My dearest!” Olenka burst out sobbing. “Vanichka, my
      dearest, my sweetheart. Why did I ever meet you? Why did I ever get to
      know you and love you? To whom have you abandoned your poor Olenka, your
      poor, unhappy Olenka?”
    

      Kukin was buried on Tuesday in the Vagankov Cemetery in Moscow. Olenka
      returned home on Wednesday; and as soon as she entered her house she threw
      herself on her bed and broke into such loud sobbing that she could be
      heard in the street and in the neighbouring yards.
    

      “The darling!” said the neighbours, crossing themselves.
      “How Olga Semyonovna, the poor darling, is grieving!”
    

      Three months afterwards Olenka was returning home from mass, downhearted
      and in deep mourning. Beside her walked a man also returning from church,
      Vasily Pustovalov, the manager of the merchant Babakayev’s
      lumber-yard. He was wearing a straw hat, a white vest with a gold chain,
      and looked more like a landowner than a business man.
    

      “Everything has its ordained course, Olga Semyonovna,” he said
      sedately, with sympathy in his voice. “And if any one near and dear
      to us dies, then it means it was God’s will and we should remember
      that and bear it with submission.”
    

      He took her to the wicket-gate, said good-bye and went away. After that
      she heard his sedate voice the whole day; and on closing her eyes she
      instantly had a vision of his dark beard. She took a great liking to him.
      And evidently he had been impressed by her, too; for, not long after, an
      elderly woman, a distant acquaintance, came in to have a cup of coffee
      with her. As soon as the woman was seated at table she began to speak
      about Pustovalov—how good he was, what a steady man, and any woman
      could be glad to get him as a husband. Three days later Pustovalov himself
      paid Olenka a visit. He stayed only about ten minutes, and spoke little,
      but Olenka fell in love with him, fell in love so desperately that she did
      not sleep the whole night and burned as with fever. In the morning she
      sent for the elderly woman. Soon after, Olenka and Pustovalov were
      engaged, and the wedding followed.
    

      Pustovalov and Olenka lived happily together. He usually stayed in the
      lumber-yard until dinner, then went out on business. In his absence Olenka
      took his place in the office until evening, attending to the book-keeping
      and despatching the orders.
    

      “Lumber rises twenty per cent every year nowadays,” she told
      her customers and acquaintances. “Imagine, we used to buy wood from
      our forests here. Now Vasichka has to go every year to the government of
      Mogilev to get wood. And what a tax!” she exclaimed, covering her
      cheeks with her hands in terror. “What a tax!”
    

      She felt as if she had been dealing in lumber for ever so long, that the
      most important and essential thing in life was lumber. There was something
      touching and endearing in the way she pronounced the words, “beam,”
      “joist,” “plank,” “stave,” “lath,”
      “gun-carriage,” “clamp.” At night she dreamed of
      whole mountains of boards and planks, long, endless rows of wagons
      conveying the wood somewhere, far, far from the city. She dreamed that a
      whole regiment of beams, 36 ft. x 5 in., were advancing in an upright
      position to do battle against the lumber-yard; that the beams and joists
      and clamps were knocking against each other, emitting the sharp crackling
      reports of dry wood, that they were all falling and then rising again,
      piling on top of each other. Olenka cried out in her sleep, and Pustovalov
      said to her gently:
    

      “Olenka my dear, what is the matter? Cross yourself.”
    

      Her husband’s opinions were all hers. If he thought the room was too
      hot, she thought so too. If he thought business was dull, she thought
      business was dull. Pustovalov was not fond of amusements and stayed home
      on holidays; she did the same.
    

      “You are always either at home or in the office,” said her
      friends. “Why don’t you go to the theatre or to the circus,
      darling?”
    

      “Vasichka and I never go to the theatre,” she answered
      sedately. “We have work to do, we have no time for nonsense. What
      does one get out of going to theatre?”
    

      On Saturdays she and Pustovalov went to vespers, and on holidays to early
      mass. On returning home they walked side by side with rapt faces, an
      agreeable smell emanating from both of them and her silk dress rustling
      pleasantly. At home they drank tea with milk-bread and various jams, and
      then ate pie. Every day at noontime there was an appetising odour in the
      yard and outside the gate of cabbage soup, roast mutton, or duck; and, on
      fast days, of fish. You couldn’t pass the gate without being seized
      by an acute desire to eat. The samovar was always boiling on the office
      table, and customers were treated to tea and biscuits. Once a week the
      married couple went to the baths and returned with red faces, walking side
      by side.
    

      “We are getting along very well, thank God,” said Olenka to
      her friends. “God grant that all should live as well as Vasichka and
      I.”
    

      When Pustovalov went to the government of Mogilev to buy wood, she was
      dreadfully homesick for him, did not sleep nights, and cried. Sometimes
      the veterinary surgeon of the regiment, Smirnov, a young man who lodged in
      the wing of her house, came to see her evenings. He related incidents, or
      they played cards together. This distracted her. The most interesting of
      his stories were those of his own life. He was married and had a son; but
      he had separated from his wife because she had deceived him, and now he
      hated her and sent her forty rubles a month for his son’s support.
      Olenka sighed, shook her head, and was sorry for him.
    

      “Well, the Lord keep you,” she said, as she saw him off to the
      door by candlelight. “Thank you for coming to kill time with me. May
      God give you health. Mother in Heaven!” She spoke very sedately,
      very judiciously, imitating her husband. The veterinary surgeon had
      disappeared behind the door when she called out after him: “Do you
      know, Vladimir Platonych, you ought to make up with your wife. Forgive
      her, if only for the sake of your son. The child understands everything,
      you may be sure.”
    

      When Pustovalov returned, she told him in a low voice about the veterinary
      surgeon and his unhappy family life; and they sighed and shook their
      heads, and talked about the boy who must be homesick for his father. Then,
      by a strange association of ideas, they both stopped before the sacred
      images, made genuflections, and prayed to God to send them children.
    

      And so the Pustovalovs lived for full six years, quietly and peaceably, in
      perfect love and harmony. But once in the winter Vasily Andreyich, after
      drinking some hot tea, went out into the lumber-yard without a hat on his
      head, caught a cold and took sick. He was treated by the best physicians,
      but the malady progressed, and he died after an illness of four months.
      Olenka was again left a widow.
    

      “To whom have you left me, my darling?” she wailed after the
      funeral. “How shall I live now without you, wretched creature that I
      am. Pity me, good people, pity me, fatherless and motherless, all alone in
      the world!”
    

      She went about dressed in black and weepers, and she gave up wearing hats
      and gloves for good. She hardly left the house except to go to church and
      to visit her husband’s grave. She almost led the life of a nun.
    

      It was not until six months had passed that she took off the weepers and
      opened her shutters. She began to go out occasionally in the morning to
      market with her cook. But how she lived at home and what went on there,
      could only be surmised. It could be surmised from the fact that she was
      seen in her little garden drinking tea with the veterinarian while he read
      the paper out loud to her, and also from the fact that once on meeting an
      acquaintance at the post-office, she said to her:
    

      “There is no proper veterinary inspection in our town. That is why
      there is so much disease. You constantly hear of people getting sick from
      the milk and becoming infected by the horses and cows. The health of
      domestic animals ought really to be looked after as much as that of human
      beings.”
    

      She repeated the veterinarian’s words and held the same opinions as
      he about everything. It was plain that she could not exist a single year
      without an attachment, and she found her new happiness in the wing of her
      house. In any one else this would have been condemned; but no one could
      think ill of Olenka. Everything in her life was so transparent. She and
      the veterinary surgeon never spoke about the change in their relations.
      They tried, in fact, to conceal it, but unsuccessfully; for Olenka could
      have no secrets. When the surgeon’s colleagues from the regiment
      came to see him, she poured tea, and served the supper, and talked to them
      about the cattle plague, the foot and mouth disease, and the municipal
      slaughter houses. The surgeon was dreadfully embarrassed, and after the
      visitors had left, he caught her hand and hissed angrily:
    

      “Didn’t I ask you not to talk about what you don’t
      understand? When we doctors discuss things, please don’t mix in. It’s
      getting to be a nuisance.”
    

      She looked at him in astonishment and alarm, and asked:
    

      “But, Volodichka, what am I to talk about?”
    

      And she threw her arms round his neck, with tears in her eyes, and begged
      him not to be angry. And they were both happy.
    

      But their happiness was of short duration. The veterinary surgeon went
      away with his regiment to be gone for good, when it was transferred to
      some distant place almost as far as Siberia, and Olenka was left alone.
    

      Now she was completely alone. Her father had long been dead, and his
      armchair lay in the attic covered with dust and minus one leg. She got
      thin and homely, and the people who met her on the street no longer looked
      at her as they had used to, nor smiled at her. Evidently her best years
      were over, past and gone, and a new, dubious life was to begin which it
      were better not to think about.
    

      In the evening Olenka sat on the steps and heard the music playing and the
      rockets bursting in the Tivoli; but it no longer aroused any response in
      her. She looked listlessly into the yard, thought of nothing, wanted
      nothing, and when night came on, she went to bed and dreamed of nothing
      but the empty yard. She ate and drank as though by compulsion.
    

      And what was worst of all, she no longer held any opinions. She saw and
      understood everything that went on around her, but she could not form an
      opinion about it. She knew of nothing to talk about. And how dreadful not
      to have opinions! For instance, you see a bottle, or you see that it is
      raining, or you see a muzhik riding by in a wagon. But what the bottle or
      the rain or the muzhik are for, or what the sense of them all is, you
      cannot tell—you cannot tell, not for a thousand rubles. In the days
      of Kukin and Pustovalov and then of the veterinary surgeon, Olenka had had
      an explanation for everything, and would have given her opinion freely no
      matter about what. But now there was the same emptiness in her heart and
      brain as in her yard. It was as galling and bitter as a taste of wormwood.
    

      Gradually the town grew up all around. The Gypsy Road had become a street,
      and where the Tivoli and the lumber-yard had been, there were now houses
      and a row of side streets. How quickly time flies! Olenka’s house
      turned gloomy, the roof rusty, the shed slanting. Dock and thistles
      overgrew the yard. Olenka herself had aged and grown homely. In the summer
      she sat on the steps, and her soul was empty and dreary and bitter. When
      she caught the breath of spring, or when the wind wafted the chime of the
      cathedral bells, a sudden flood of memories would pour over her, her heart
      would expand with a tender warmth, and the tears would stream down her
      cheeks. But that lasted only a moment. Then would come emptiness again,
      and the feeling, What is the use of living? The black kitten Bryska rubbed
      up against her and purred softly, but the little creature’s caresses
      left Olenka untouched. That was not what she needed. What she needed was a
      love that would absorb her whole being, her reason, her whole soul, that
      would give her ideas, an object in life, that would warm her aging blood.
      And she shook the black kitten off her skirt angrily, saying:
    

      “Go away! What are you doing here?”
    

      And so day after day, year after year not a single joy, not a single
      opinion. Whatever Marva, the cook, said was all right.
    

      One hot day in July, towards evening, as the town cattle were being driven
      by, and the whole yard was filled with clouds of dust, there was suddenly
      a knocking at the gate. Olenka herself went to open it, and was
      dumbfounded to behold the veterinarian Smirnov. He had turned grey and was
      dressed as a civilian. All the old memories flooded into her soul, she
      could not restrain herself, she burst out crying, and laid her head on
      Smirnov’s breast without saying a word. So overcome was she that she
      was totally unconscious of how they walked into the house and seated
      themselves to drink tea.
    

      “My darling!” she murmured, trembling with joy. “Vladimir
      Platonych, from where has God sent you?”
    

      “I want to settle here for good,” he told her. “I have
      resigned my position and have come here to try my fortune as a free man
      and lead a settled life. Besides, it’s time to send my boy to the
      gymnasium. He is grown up now. You know, my wife and I have become
      reconciled.”
    

      “Where is she?” asked Olenka.
    

      “At the hotel with the boy. I am looking for lodgings.”
    

      “Good gracious, bless you, take my house. Why won’t my house
      do? Oh, dear! Why, I won’t ask any rent of you,” Olenka burst
      out in the greatest excitement, and began to cry again. “You live
      here, and the wing will be enough for me. Oh, Heavens, what a joy!”
    

      The very next day the roof was being painted and the walls whitewashed,
      and Olenka, arms akimbo, was going about the yard superintending. Her face
      brightened with her old smile. Her whole being revived and freshened, as
      though she had awakened from a long sleep. The veterinarian’s wife
      and child arrived. She was a thin, plain woman, with a crabbed expression.
      The boy Sasha, small for his ten years of age, was a chubby child, with
      clear blue eyes and dimples in his cheeks. He made for the kitten the
      instant he entered the yard, and the place rang with his happy laughter.
    

      “Is that your cat, auntie?” he asked Olenka. “When she
      has little kitties, please give me one. Mamma is awfully afraid of mice.”
    

      Olenka chatted with him, gave him tea, and there was a sudden warmth in
      her bosom and a soft gripping at her heart, as though the boy were her own
      son.
    

      In the evening, when he sat in the dining-room studying his lessons, she
      looked at him tenderly and whispered to herself:
    

      “My darling, my pretty. You are such a clever child, so good to look
      at.”
    

      “An island is a tract of land entirely surrounded by water,”
      he recited.
    

      “An island is a tract of land,” she repeated—the first
      idea asseverated with conviction after so many years of silence and mental
      emptiness.
    

      She now had her opinions, and at supper discussed with Sasha’s
      parents how difficult the studies had become for the children at the
      gymnasium, but how, after all, a classical education was better than a
      commercial course, because when you graduated from the gymnasium then the
      road was open to you for any career at all. If you chose to, you could
      become a doctor, or, if you wanted to, you could become an engineer.
    

      Sasha began to go to the gymnasium. His mother left on a visit to her
      sister in Kharkov and never came back. The father was away every day
      inspecting cattle, and sometimes was gone three whole days at a time, so
      that Sasha, it seemed to Olenka, was utterly abandoned, was treated as if
      he were quite superfluous, and must be dying of hunger. So she transferred
      him into the wing along with herself and fixed up a little room for him
      there.
    

      Every morning Olenka would come into his room and find him sound asleep
      with his hand tucked under his cheek, so quiet that he seemed not to be
      breathing. What a shame to have to wake him, she thought.
    

      “Sashenka,” she said sorrowingly, “get up, darling. It’s
      time to go to the gymnasium.”
    

      He got up, dressed, said his prayers, then sat down to drink tea. He drank
      three glasses of tea, ate two large cracknels and half a buttered roll.
      The sleep was not yet out of him, so he was a little cross.
    

      “You don’t know your fable as you should, Sashenka,”
      said Olenka, looking at him as though he were departing on a long journey.
      “What a lot of trouble you are. You must try hard and learn, dear,
      and mind your teachers.”
    

      “Oh, let me alone, please,” said Sasha.
    

      Then he went down the street to the gymnasium, a little fellow wearing a
      large cap and carrying a satchel on his back. Olenka followed him
      noiselessly.
    

      “Sashenka,” she called.
    

      He looked round and she shoved a date or a caramel into his hand. When he
      reached the street of the gymnasium, he turned around and said, ashamed of
      being followed by a tall, stout woman:
    

      “You had better go home, aunt. I can go the rest of the way myself.”
    

      She stopped and stared after him until he had disappeared into the school
      entrance.
    

      Oh, how she loved him! Not one of her other ties had been so deep. Never
      before had she given herself so completely, so disinterestedly, so
      cheerfully as now that her maternal instincts were all aroused. For this
      boy, who was not hers, for the dimples in his cheeks and for his big cap,
      she would have given her life, given it with joy and with tears of
      rapture. Why? Ah, indeed, why?
    

      When she had seen Sasha off to the gymnasium, she returned home quietly,
      content, serene, overflowing with love. Her face, which had grown younger
      in the last half year, smiled and beamed. People who met her were pleased
      as they looked at her.
    

      “How are you, Olga Semyonovna, darling? How are you getting on,
      darling?”
    

      “The gymnasium course is very hard nowadays,” she told at the
      market. “It’s no joke. Yesterday the first class had a fable
      to learn by heart, a Latin translation, and a problem. How is a little
      fellow to do all that?”
    

      And she spoke of the teacher and the lessons and the text-books, repeating
      exactly what Sasha said about them.
    

      At three o’clock they had dinner. In the evening they prepared the
      lessons together, and Olenka wept with Sasha over the difficulties. When
      she put him to bed, she lingered a long time making the sign of the cross
      over him and muttering a prayer. And when she lay in bed, she dreamed of
      the far-away, misty future when Sasha would finish his studies and become
      a doctor or an engineer, have a large house of his own, with horses and a
      carriage, marry and have children. She would fall asleep still thinking of
      the same things, and tears would roll down her cheeks from her closed
      eyes. And the black cat would lie at her side purring: “Mrr, mrr,
      mrr.”
    

      Suddenly there was a loud knocking at the gate. Olenka woke up breathless
      with fright, her heart beating violently. Half a minute later there was
      another knock.
    

      “A telegram from Kharkov,” she thought, her whole body in a
      tremble. “His mother wants Sasha to come to her in Kharkov. Oh,
      great God!”
    

      She was in despair. Her head, her feet, her hands turned cold. There was
      no unhappier creature in the world, she felt. But another minute passed,
      she heard voices. It was the veterinarian coming home from the club.
    

      “Thank God,” she thought. The load gradually fell from her
      heart, she was at ease again. And she went back to bed, thinking of Sasha
      who lay fast asleep in the next room and sometimes cried out in his sleep:
    

      “I’ll give it to you! Get away! Quit your scrapping!”
    











      THE BET
    

      BY ANTON P. CHEKHOV
    

      I
    

It was a dark
      autumn night. The old banker was pacing from corner to corner of his
      study, recalling to his mind the party he gave in the autumn fifteen years
      before. There were many clever people at the party and much interesting
      conversation. They talked among other things of capital punishment. The
      guests, among them not a few scholars and journalists, for the most part
      disapproved of capital punishment. They found it obsolete as a means of
      punishment, unfitted to a Christian State and immoral. Some of them
      thought that capital punishment should be replaced universally by
      life-imprisonment.
    

      “I don’t agree with you,” said the host. “I myself
      have experienced neither capital punishment nor life-imprisonment, but if
      one may judge a priori, then in my opinion capital punishment is
      more moral and more humane than imprisonment. Execution kills instantly,
      life-imprisonment kills by degrees. Who is the more humane executioner,
      one who kills you in a few seconds or one who draws the life out of you
      incessantly, for years?”
    

      “They’re both equally immoral,” remarked one of the
      guests, “because their purpose is the same, to take away life. The
      State is not God. It has no right to take away that which it cannot give
      back, if it should so desire.”
    

      Among the company was a lawyer, a young man of about twenty-five. On being
      asked his opinion, he said:
    

      “Capital punishment and life-imprisonment are equally immoral; but
      if I were offered the choice between them, I would certainly choose the
      second. It’s better to live somehow than not to live at all.”
    

      There ensued a lively discussion. The banker who was then younger and more
      nervous suddenly lost his temper, banged his fist on the table, and
      turning to the young lawyer, cried out:
    

      “It’s a lie. I bet you two millions you wouldn’t stick
      in a cell even for five years.”
    

      “If you mean it seriously,” replied the lawyer, “then I
      bet I’ll stay not five but fifteen.”
    

      “Fifteen! Done!” cried the banker. “Gentlemen, I stake
      two millions.”
    

      “Agreed. You stake two millions, I my freedom,” said the
      lawyer.
    

      So this wild, ridiculous bet came to pass. The banker, who at that time
      had too many millions to count, spoiled and capricious, was beside himself
      with rapture. During supper he said to the lawyer jokingly:
    

      “Come to your senses, young roan, before it’s too late. Two
      millions are nothing to me, but you stand to lose three or four of the
      best years of your life. I say three or four, because you’ll never
      stick it out any longer. Don’t forget either, you unhappy man, that
      voluntary is much heavier than enforced imprisonment. The idea that you
      have the right to free yourself at any moment will poison the whole of
      your life in the cell. I pity you.”
    

      And now the banker, pacing from corner to corner, recalled all this and
      asked himself:
    

      “Why did I make this bet? What’s the good? The lawyer loses
      fifteen years of his life and I throw away two millions. Will it convince
      people that capital punishment is worse or better than imprisonment for
      life? No, no! all stuff and rubbish. On my part, it was the caprice of a
      well-fed man; on the lawyer’s pure greed of gold.”
    

      He recollected further what happened after the evening party. It was
      decided that the lawyer must undergo his imprisonment under the strictest
      observation, in a garden wing of the banker’s house. It was agreed
      that during the period he would be deprived of the right to cross the
      threshold, to see living people, to hear human voices, and to receive
      letters and newspapers. He was permitted to have a musical instrument, to
      read books, to write letters, to drink wine and smoke tobacco. By the
      agreement he could communicate, but only in silence, with the outside
      world through a little window specially constructed for this purpose.
      Everything necessary, books, music, wine, he could receive in any quantity
      by sending a note through the window. The agreement provided for all the
      minutest details, which made the confinement strictly solitary, and it
      obliged the lawyer to remain exactly fifteen years from twelve o’clock
      of November 14th, 1870, to twelve o’clock of November 14th, 1885.
      The least attempt on his part to violate the conditions, to escape if only
      for two minutes before the time freed the banker from the obligation to
      pay him the two millions.
    

      During the first year of imprisonment, the lawyer, as far as it was
      possible to judge from his short notes, suffered terribly from loneliness
      and boredom. From his wing day and night came the sound of the piano. He
      rejected wine and tobacco. “Wine,” he wrote, “excites
      desires, and desires are the chief foes of a prisoner; besides, nothing is
      more boring than to drink good wine alone,” and tobacco spoils the
      air in his room. During the first year the lawyer was sent books of a
      light character; novels with a complicated love interest, stories of crime
      and fantasy, comedies, and so on.
    

      In the second year the piano was heard no longer and the lawyer asked only
      for classics. In the fifth year, music was heard again, and the prisoner
      asked for wine. Those who watched him said that during the whole of that
      year he was only eating, drinking, and lying on his bed. He yawned often
      and talked angrily to himself. Books he did not read. Sometimes at nights
      he would sit down to write. He would write for a long time and tear it all
      up in the morning. More than once he was heard to weep.
    

      In the second half of the sixth year, the prisoner began zealously to
      study languages, philosophy, and history. He fell on these subjects so
      hungrily that the banker hardly had time to get books enough for him. In
      the space of four years about six hundred volumes were bought at his
      request. It was while that passion lasted that the banker received the
      following letter from the prisoner: “My dear gaoler, I am writing
      these lines in six languages. Show them to experts. Let them read them. If
      they do not find one single mistake, I beg you to give orders to have a
      gun fired off in the garden. By the noise I shall know that my efforts
      have not been in vain. The geniuses of all ages and countries speak in
      different languages; but in them all burns the same flame. Oh, if you knew
      my heavenly happiness now that I can understand them!” The prisoner’s
      desire was fulfilled. Two shots were fired in the garden by the banker’s
      order.
    

      Later on, after the tenth year, the lawyer sat immovable before his table
      and read only the New Testament. The banker found it strange that a man
      who in four years had mastered six hundred erudite volumes, should have
      spent nearly a year in reading one book, easy to understand and by no
      means thick. The New Testament was then replaced by the history of
      religions and theology.
    

      During the last two years of his confinement the prisoner read an
      extraordinary amount, quite haphazard. Now he would apply himself to the
      natural sciences, then he would read Byron or Shakespeare. Notes used to
      come from him in which he asked to be sent at the same time a book on
      chemistry, a text-book of medicine, a novel, and some treatise on
      philosophy or theology. He read as though he were swimming in the sea
      among broken pieces of wreckage, and in his desire to save his life was
      eagerly grasping one piece after another.
    

      II
    

The banker recalled
      all this, and thought:
    

      “To-morrow at twelve o’clock he receives his freedom. Under
      the agreement, I shall have to pay him two millions. If I pay, it’s
      all over with me. I am ruined for ever ...”
    

      Fifteen years before he had too many millions to count, but now he was
      afraid to ask himself which he had more of, money or debts. Gambling on
      the Stock-Exchange, risky speculation, and the recklessness of which he
      could not rid himself even in old age, had gradually brought his business
      to decay; and the fearless, self-confident, proud man of business had
      become an ordinary banker, trembling at every rise and fall in the market.
    

      “That cursed bet,” murmured the old man clutching his head in
      despair... “Why didn’t the man die? He’s only forty
      years old. He will take away my last farthing, marry, enjoy life, gamble
      on the Exchange, and I will look on like an envious beggar and hear the
      same words from him every day: ‘I’m obliged to you for the
      happiness of my life. Let me help you.’ No, it’s too much! The
      only escape from bankruptcy and disgrace—is that the man should die.”
    

      The clock had just struck three. The banker was listening. In the house
      every one was asleep, and one could hear only the frozen trees whining
      outside the windows. Trying to make no sound, he took out of his safe the
      key of the door which had not been opened for fifteen years, put on his
      overcoat, and went out of the house. The garden was dark and cold. It was
      raining. A damp, penetrating wind howled in the garden and gave the trees
      no rest. Though he strained his eyes, the banker could see neither the
      ground, nor the white statues, nor the garden wing, nor the trees.
      Approaching the garden wing, he called the watchman twice. There was no
      answer. Evidently the watchman had taken shelter from the bad weather and
      was now asleep somewhere in the kitchen or the greenhouse.
    

      “If I have the courage to fulfil my intention,” thought the
      old man, “the suspicion will fall on the watchman first of all.”
    

      In the darkness he groped for the steps and the door and entered the hall
      of the garden-wing, then poked his way into a narrow passage and struck a
      match. Not a soul was there. Some one’s bed, with no bedclothes on
      it, stood there, and an iron stove loomed dark in the corner. The seals on
      the door that led into the prisoner’s room were unbroken.
    

      When the match went out, the old man, trembling from agitation, peeped
      into the little window.
    

      In the prisoner’s room a candle was burning dimly. The prisoner
      himself sat by the table. Only his back, the hair on his head and his
      hands were visible. Open books were strewn about on the table, the two
      chairs, and on the carpet near the table.
    

      Five minutes passed and the prisoner never once stirred. Fifteen years’
      confinement had taught him to sit motionless. The banker tapped on the
      window with his finger, but the prisoner made no movement in reply. Then
      the banker cautiously tore the seals from the door and put the key into
      the lock. The rusty lock gave a hoarse groan and the door creaked. The
      banker expected instantly to hear a cry of surprise and the sound of
      steps. Three minutes passed and it was as quiet inside as it had been
      before. He made up his mind to enter.
    

      Before the table sat a man, unlike an ordinary human being. It was a
      skeleton, with tight-drawn skin, with long curly hair like a woman’s,
      and a shaggy beard. The colour of his face was yellow, of an earthy shade;
      the cheeks were sunken, the back long and narrow, and the hand upon which
      he leaned his hairy head was so lean and skinny that it was painful to
      look upon. His hair was already silvering with grey, and no one who
      glanced at the senile emaciation of the face would have believed that he
      was only forty years old. On the table, before his bended head, lay a
      sheet of paper on which something was written in a tiny hand.
    

      “Poor devil,” thought the banker, “he’s asleep and
      probably seeing millions in his dreams. I have only to take and throw this
      half-dead thing on the bed, smother him a moment with the pillow, and the
      most careful examination will find no trace of unnatural death. But,
      first, let us read what he has written here.”
    

      The banker took the sheet from the table and read:
    

      “To-morrow at twelve o’clock midnight, I shall obtain my
      freedom and the right to mix with people. But before I leave this room and
      see the sun I think it necessary to say a few words to you. On my own
      clear conscience and before God who sees me I declare to you that I
      despise freedom, life, health, and all that your books call the blessings
      of the world.
    

      “For fifteen years I have diligently studied earthly life. True, I
      saw neither the earth nor the people, but in your books I drank fragrant
      wine, sang songs, hunted deer and wild boar in the forests, loved women...
      And beautiful women, like clouds ethereal, created by the magic of your
      poets’ genius, visited me by night and whispered to me wonderful
      tales, which made my head drunken. In your books I climbed the summits of
      Elbruz and Mont Blanc and saw from there how the sun rose in the morning,
      and in the evening suffused the sky, the ocean and the mountain ridges
      with a purple gold. I saw from there how above me lightnings glimmered
      cleaving the clouds; I saw green forests, fields, rivers, lakes, cities; I
      heard syrens singing, and the playing of the pipes of Pan; I touched the
      wings of beautiful devils who came flying to me to speak of God... In your
      books I cast myself into bottomless abysses, worked miracles, burned
      cities to the ground, preached new religions, conquered whole countries...
    

      “Your books gave me wisdom. All that unwearying human thought
      created in the centuries is compressed to a little lump in my skull. I
      know that I am cleverer than you all.
    

      “And I despise your books, despise all worldly blessings and wisdom.
      Everything is void, frail, visionary and delusive as a mirage. Though you
      be proud and wise and beautiful, yet will death wipe you from the face of
      the earth like the mice underground; and your posterity, your history, and
      the immortality of your men of genius will be as frozen slag, burnt down
      together with the terrestrial globe.
    

      “You are mad, and gone the wrong way. You take falsehood for truth
      and ugliness for beauty. You would marvel if suddenly apple and orange
      trees should bear frogs and lizards instead of fruit, and if roses should
      begin to breathe the odour of a sweating horse. So do I marvel at you, who
      have bartered heaven for earth. I do not want to understand you.
    

      “That I may show you in deed my contempt for that by which you live,
      I waive the two millions of which I once dreamed as of paradise, and which
      I now despise. That I may deprive myself of my right to them, I shall come
      out from here five minutes before the stipulated term, and thus shall
      violate the agreement.”
    

      When he had read, the banker put the sheet on the table, kissed the head
      of the strange man, and began to weep. He went out of the wing. Never at
      any other time, not even after his terrible losses on the Exchange, had he
      felt such contempt for himself as now. Coming home, he lay down on his
      bed, but agitation and tears kept him a long time from sleeping...
    

      The next morning the poor watchman came running to him and told him that
      they had seen the man who lived in the wing climb through the window into
      the garden. He had gone to the gate and disappeared. The banker instantly
      went with his servants to the wing and established the escape of his
      prisoner. To avoid unnecessary rumours he took the paper with the
      renunciation from the table and, on his return, locked it in his safe.
    











      VANKA
    

      BY ANTON P. CHEKHOV
    

Nine-year-old Vanka
      Zhukov, who had been apprentice to the shoemaker Aliakhin for three
      months, did not go to bed the night before Christmas. He waited till the
      master and mistress and the assistants had gone out to an early
      church-service, to procure from his employer’s cupboard a small
      phial of ink and a penholder with a rusty nib; then, spreading a crumpled
      sheet of paper in front of him, he began to write.
    

      Before, however, deciding to make the first letter, he looked furtively at
      the door and at the window, glanced several times at the sombre ikon, on
      either side of which stretched shelves full of lasts, and heaved a
      heart-rending sigh. The sheet of paper was spread on a bench, and he
      himself was on his knees in front of it.
    

      “Dear Grandfather Konstantin Makarych,” he wrote, “I am
      writing you a letter. I wish you a Happy Christmas and all God’s
      holy best. I have no mamma or papa, you are all I have.”
    

      Vanka gave a look towards the window in which shone the reflection of his
      candle, and vividly pictured to himself his grandfather, Konstantin
      Makarych, who was night-watchman at Messrs. Zhivarev. He was a small,
      lean, unusually lively and active old man of sixty-five, always smiling
      and blear-eyed. All day he slept in the servants’ kitchen or trifled
      with the cooks. At night, enveloped in an ample sheep-skin coat, he
      strayed round the domain tapping with his cudgel. Behind him, each hanging
      its head, walked the old bitch Kashtanka, and the dog Viun, so named
      because of his black coat and long body and his resemblance to a loach.
      Viun was an unusually civil and friendly dog, looking as kindly at a
      stranger as at his masters, but he was not to be trusted. Beneath his
      deference and humbleness was hid the most inquisitorial maliciousness. No
      one knew better than he how to sneak up and take a bite at a leg, or slip
      into the larder or steal a muzhik’s chicken. More than once they had
      nearly broken his hind-legs, twice he had been hung up, every week he was
      nearly flogged to death, but he always recovered.
    

      At this moment, for certain, Vanka’s grandfather must be standing at
      the gate, bFlinking his eyes at the bright red windows of the village
      church, stamping his feet in their high-felt boots, and jesting with the
      people in the yard; his cudgel will be hanging from his belt, he will be
      hugging himself with cold, giving a little dry, old man’s cough, and
      at times pinching a servant-girl or a cook.
    

      “Won’t we take some snuff?” he asks, holding out his
      snuff-box to the women. The women take a pinch of snuff, and sneeze.
    

      The old man goes into indescribable ecstasies, breaks into loud laughter,
      and cries:
    

      “Off with it, it will freeze to your nose!”
    

      He gives his snuff to the dogs, too. Kashtanka sneezes, twitches her nose,
      and walks away offended. Viun deferentially refuses to sniff and wags his
      tail. It is glorious weather, not a breath of wind, clear, and frosty; it
      is a dark night, but the whole village, its white roofs and streaks of
      smoke from the chimneys, the trees silvered with hoar-frost, and the
      snowdrifts, you can see it all. The sky scintillates with bright twinkling
      stars, and the Milky Way stands out so clearly that it looks as if it had
      been polished and rubbed over with snow for the holidays...
    

      Vanka sighs, dips his pen in the ink, and continues to write:
    

      “Last night I got a thrashing, my master dragged me by my hair into
      the yard, and belaboured me with a shoe-maker’s stirrup, because,
      while I was rocking his brat in its cradle, I unfortunately fell asleep.
      And during the week, my mistress told me to clean a herring, and I began
      by its tail, so she took the herring and stuck its snout into my face. The
      assistants tease me, send me to the tavern for vodka, make me steal the
      master’s cucumbers, and the master beats me with whatever is handy.
      Food there is none; in the morning it’s bread, at dinner gruel, and
      in the evening bread again. As for tea or sour-cabbage soup, the master
      and the mistress themselves guzzle that. They make me sleep in the
      vestibule, and when their brat cries, I don’t sleep at all, but have
      to rock the cradle. Dear Grandpapa, for Heaven’s sake, take me away
      from here, home to our village, I can’t bear this any more... I bow
      to the ground to you, and will pray to God for ever and ever, take me from
      here or I shall die...”
    

      The corners of Vanka’s mouth went down, he rubbed his eyes with his
      dirty fist, and sobbed.
    

      “I’ll grate your tobacco for you,” he continued, “I’ll
      pray to God for you, and if there is anything wrong, then flog me like the
      grey goat. And if you really think I shan’t find work, then I’ll
      ask the manager, for Christ’s sake, to let me clean the boots, or I’ll
      go instead of Fedya as underherdsman. Dear Grandpapa, I can’t bear
      this any more, it’ll kill me... I wanted to run away to our village,
      but I have no boots, and I was afraid of the frost, and when I grow up I’ll
      look after you, no one shall harm you, and when you die I’ll pray
      for the repose of your soul, just like I do for mamma Pelagueya.
    

      “As for Moscow, it is a large town, there are all gentlemen’s
      houses, lots of horses, no sheep, and the dogs are not vicious. The
      children don’t come round at Christmas with a star, no one is
      allowed to sing in the choir, and once I saw in a shop window hooks on a
      line and fishing rods, all for sale, and for every kind of fish, awfully
      convenient. And there was one hook which would catch a sheat-fish weighing
      a pound. And there are shops with guns, like the master’s, and I am
      sure they must cost 100 rubles each. And in the meat-shops there are
      woodcocks, partridges, and hares, but who shot them or where they come
      from, the shopman won’t say.
    

      “Dear Grandpapa, and when the masters give a Christmas tree, take a
      golden walnut and hide it in my green box. Ask the young lady, Olga
      Ignatyevna, for it, say it’s for Vanka.”
    

      Vanka sighed convulsively, and again stared at the window. He remembered
      that his grandfather always went to the forest for the Christmas tree, and
      took his grandson with him. What happy times! The frost crackled, his
      grandfather crackled, and as they both did, Vanka did the same. Then
      before cutting down the Christmas tree his grandfather smoked his pipe,
      took a long pinch of snuff, and made fun of poor frozen little Vanka...
      The young fir trees, wrapt in hoar-frost, stood motionless, waiting for
      which of them would die. Suddenly a hare springing from somewhere would
      dart over the snowdrift... His grandfather could not help shouting:
    

      “Catch it, catch it, catch it! Ah, short-tailed devil!”
    

      When the tree was down, his grandfather dragged it to the master’s
      house, and there they set about decorating it. The young lady, Olga
      Ignatyevna, Vanka’s great friend, busied herself most about it. When
      little Vanka’s mother, Pelagueya, was still alive, and was
      servant-woman in the house, Olga Ignatyevna used to stuff him with
      sugar-candy, and, having nothing to do, taught him to read, write, count
      up to one hundred, and even to dance the quadrille. When Pelagueya died,
      they placed the orphan Vanka in the kitchen with his grandfather, and from
      the kitchen he was sent to Moscow to Aliakhin, the shoemaker.
    

      “Come quick, dear Grandpapa,” continued Vanka, “I
      beseech you for Christ’s sake take me from here. Have pity on a poor
      orphan, for here they beat me, and I am frightfully hungry, and so sad
      that I can’t tell you, I cry all the time. The other day the master
      hit me on the head with a last; I fell to the ground, and only just
      returned to life. My life is a misfortune, worse than any dog’s... I
      send greetings to Aliona, to one-eyed Tegor, and the coachman, and don’t
      let any one have my mouth-organ. I remain, your grandson, Ivan Zhukov,
      dear Grandpapa, do come.”
    

      Vanka folded his sheet of paper in four, and put it into an envelope
      purchased the night before for a kopek. He thought a little, dipped the
      pen into the ink, and wrote the address:
    

      “The village, to my grandfather.” He then scratched his head,
      thought again, and added: “Konstantin Makarych.” Pleased at
      not having been interfered with in his writing, he put on his cap, and,
      without putting on his sheep-skin coat, ran out in his shirt-sleeves into
      the street.
    

      The shopman at the poulterer’s, from whom he had inquired the night
      before, had told him that letters were to be put into post-boxes, and from
      there they were conveyed over the whole earth in mail troikas by drunken
      post-boys and to the sound of bells. Vanka ran to the first post-box and
      slipped his precious letter into the slit.
    

      An hour afterwards, lulled by hope, he was sleeping soundly. In his dreams
      he saw a stove, by the stove his grandfather sitting with his legs
      dangling down, barefooted, and reading a letter to the cooks, and Viun
      walking round the stove wagging his tail.
    











      HIDE AND SEEK
    

      BY FIODOR SOLOGUB
    

Everything in
      Lelechka’s nursery was bright, pretty, and cheerful. Lelechka’s
      sweet voice charmed her mother. Lelechka was a delightful child. There was
      no other such child, there never had been, and there never would be.
      Lelechka’s mother, Serafima Aleksandrovna, was sure of that.
      Lelechka’s eyes were dark and large, her cheeks were rosy, her lips
      were made for kisses and for laughter. But it was not these charms in
      Lelechka that gave her mother the keenest joy. Lelechka was her mother’s
      only child. That was why every movement of Lelechka’s bewitched her
      mother. It was great bliss to hold Lelechka on her knees and to fondle
      her; to feel the little girl in her arms—a thing as lively and as
      bright as a little bird.
    

      To tell the truth, Serafima Aleksandrovna felt happy only in the nursery.
      She felt cold with her husband.
    

      Perhaps it was because he himself loved the cold—he loved to drink
      cold water, and to breathe cold air. He was always fresh and cool, with a
      frigid smile, and wherever he passed cold currents seemed to move in the
      air.
    

      The Nesletyevs, Sergey Modestovich and Serafima Aleksandrovna, had married
      without love or calculation, because it was the accepted thing. He was a
      young man of thirty-five, she a young woman of twenty-five; both were of
      the same circle and well brought up; he was expected to take a wife, and
      the time had come for her to take a husband.
    

      It even seemed to Serafima Aleksandrovna that she was in love with her
      future husband, and this made her happy. He looked handsome and well-bred;
      his intelligent grey eyes always preserved a dignified expression; and he
      fulfilled his obligations of a fiancÃ© with irreproachable gentleness.
    

      The bride was also good-looking; she was a tall, dark-eyed, dark-haired
      girl, somewhat timid but very tactful. He was not after her dowry, though
      it pleased him to know that she had something. He had connexions, and his
      wife came of good, influential people. This might, at the proper
      opportunity, prove useful. Always irreproachable and tactful, Nesletyev
      got on in his position not so fast that any one should envy him, nor yet
      so slow that he should envy any one else—everything came in the
      proper measure and at the proper time.
    

      After their marriage there was nothing in the manner of Sergey Modestovich
      to suggest anything wrong to his wife. Later, however, when his wife was
      about to have a child, Sergey Modestovich established connexions elsewhere
      of a light and temporary nature. Serafima Aleksandrovna found this out,
      and, to her own astonishment, was not particularly hurt; she awaited her
      infant with a restless anticipation that swallowed every other feeling.
    

      A little girl was born; Serafima Aleksandrovna gave herself up to her. At
      the beginning she used to tell her husband, with rapture, of all the
      joyous details of Lelechka’s existence. But she soon found that he
      listened to her without the slightest interest, and only from the habit of
      politeness. Serafima Aleksandrovna drifted farther and farther away from
      him. She loved her little girl with the ungratified passion that other
      women, deceived in their husbands, show their chance young lovers.
    

      “Mamochka, let’s play priatki” (hide and
      seek), cried Lelechka, pronouncing the r like the l, so that
      the word sounded “pliatki.”
    

      This charming inability to speak always made Serafima Aleksandrovna smile
      with tender rapture. Lelechka then ran away, stamping with her plump
      little legs over the carpets, and hid herself behind the curtains near her
      bed.
    

      “Tiu-tiu, mamochka!” she cried out in her sweet,
      laughing voice, as she looked out with a single roguish eye.
    

      “Where is my baby girl?” the mother asked, as she looked for
      Lelechka and made believe that she did not see her.
    

      And Lelechka poured out her rippling laughter in her hiding place. Then
      she came out a little farther, and her mother, as though she had only just
      caught sight of her, seized her by her little shoulders and exclaimed
      joyously: “Here she is, my Lelechka!”
    

      Lelechka laughed long and merrily, her head close to her mother’s
      knees, and all of her cuddled up between her mother’s white hands.
      Her mother’s eyes glowed with passionate emotion.
    

      “Now, mamochka, you hide,” said Lelechka, as she ceased
      laughing.
    

      Her mother went to hide. Lelechka turned away as though not to see, but
      watched her mamochka stealthily all the time. Mamma hid behind the
      cupboard, and exclaimed: “Tiu-tiu, baby girl!”
    

      Lelechka ran round the room and looked into all the corners, making
      believe, as her mother had done before, that she was seeking—though
      she really knew all the time where her mamochka was standing.
    

      “Where’s my mamochka?” asked Lelechka. “She’s
      not here, and she’s not here,” she kept on repeating, as she
      ran from corner to corner.
    

      Her mother stood, with suppressed breathing, her head pressed against the
      wall, her hair somewhat disarranged. A smile of absolute bliss played on
      her red lips.
    

      The nurse, Fedosya, a good-natured and fine-looking, if somewhat stupid
      woman, smiled as she looked at her mistress with her characteristic
      expression, which seemed to say that it was not for her to object to
      gentlewomen’s caprices. She thought to herself: “The mother is
      like a little child herself—look how excited she is.”
    

      Lelechka was getting nearer her mother’s corner. Her mother was
      growing more absorbed every moment by her interest in the game; her heart
      beat with short quick strokes, and she pressed even closer to the wall,
      disarranging her hair still more. Lelechka suddenly glanced toward her
      mother’s corner and screamed with joy.
    

      “I’ve found ‘oo,” she cried out loudly and
      joyously, mispronouncing her words in a way that again made her mother
      happy.
    

      She pulled her mother by her hands to the middle of the room, they were
      merry and they laughed; and Lelechka again hid her head against her mother’s
      knees, and went on lisping and lisping, without end, her sweet little
      words, so fascinating yet so awkward.
    

      Sergey Modestovich was coming at this moment toward the nursery. Through
      the half-closed doors he heard the laughter, the joyous outcries, the
      sound of romping. He entered the nursery, smiling his genial cold smile;
      he was irreproachably dressed, and he looked fresh and erect, and he
      spread round him an atmosphere of cleanliness, freshness and coldness. He
      entered in the midst of the lively game, and he confused them all by his
      radiant coldness. Even Fedosya felt abashed, now for her mistress, now for
      herself. Serafima Aleksandrovna at once became calm and apparently cold—and
      this mood communicated itself to the little girl, who ceased to laugh, but
      looked instead, silently and intently, at her father.
    

      Sergey Modestovich gave a swift glance round the room. He liked coming
      here, where everything was beautifully arranged; this was done by Serafima
      Aleksandrovna, who wished to surround her little girl, from her very
      infancy, only with the loveliest things. Serafima Aleksandrovna dressed
      herself tastefully; this, too, she did for Lelechka, with the same end in
      view. One thing Sergey Modestovich had not become reconciled to, and this
      was his wife’s almost continuous presence in the nursery.
    

      “It’s just as I thought... I knew that I’d find you
      here,” he said with a derisive and condescending smile.
    

      They left the nursery together. As he followed his wife through the door
      Sergey Modestovich said rather indifferently, in an incidental way, laying
      no stress on his words: “Don’t you think that it would be well
      for the little girl if she were sometimes without your company? Merely,
      you see, that the child should feel its own individuality,” he
      explained in answer to Serafima Aleksandrovna’s puzzled glance.
    

      “She’s still so little,” said Serafima Aleksandrovna.
    

      “In any case, this is but my humble opinion. I don’t insist.
      It’s your kingdom there.”
    

      “I’ll think it over,” his wife answered, smiling, as he
      did, coldly but genially.
    

      Then they began to talk of something else.
    

      II
    

Nurse Fedosya,
      sitting in the kitchen that evening, was telling the silent housemaid
      Darya and the talkative old cook Agathya about the young lady of the
      house, and how the child loved to play priatki with her mother—“She
      hides her little face, and cries ‘tiutiu’!”
    

      “And the mistress herself is like a little one,” added
      Fedosya, smiling.
    

      Agathya listened and shook her head ominously; while her face became grave
      and reproachful.
    

      “That the mistress does it, well, that’s one thing; but that
      the young lady does it, that’s bad.”
    

      “Why?” asked Fedosya with curiosity.
    

      This expression of curiosity gave her face the look of a wooden,
      roughly-painted doll.
    

      “Yes, that’s bad,” repeated Agathya with conviction.
      “Terribly bad!”
    

      “Well?” said Fedosya, the ludicrous expression of curiosity on
      her face becoming more emphatic.
    

      “She’ll hide, and hide, and hide away,” said Agathya, in
      a mysterious whisper, as she looked cautiously toward the door.
    

      “What are you saying?” exclaimed Fedosya, frightened.
    

      “It’s the truth I’m saying, remember my words,”
      Agathya went on with the same assurance and secrecy. “It’s the
      surest sign.”
    

      The old woman had invented this sign, quite suddenly, herself; and she was
      evidently very proud of it.
    

      III
    

Lelechka was
      asleep, and Serafima Aleksandrovna was sitting in her own room, thinking
      with joy and tenderness of Lelechka. Lelechka was in her thoughts, first a
      sweet, tiny girl, then a sweet, big girl, then again a delightful little
      girl; and so until the end she remained mamma’s little Lelechka.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna did not even notice that Fedosya came up to her and
      paused before her. Fedosya had a worried, frightened look.
    

      “Madam, madam,” she said quietly, in a trembling voice.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna gave a start. Fedosya’s face made her
      anxious.
    

      “What is it, Fedosya?” she asked with great concern. “Is
      there anything wrong with Lelechka?”
    

      “No, madam,” said Fedosya, as she gesticulated with her hands
      to reassure her mistress and to make her sit down. “Lelechka is
      asleep, may God be with her! Only I’d like to say something—you
      see—Lelechka is always hiding herself—that’s not good.”
    

      Fedosya looked at her mistress with fixed eyes, which had grown round from
      fright.
    

      “Why not good?” asked Serafima Aleksandrovna, with vexation,
      succumbing involuntarily to vague fears.
    

      “I can’t tell you how bad it is,” said Fedosya, and her
      face expressed the most decided confidence.
    

      “Please speak in a sensible way,” observed Serafima
      Aleksandrovna dryly. “I understand nothing of what you are saying.”
    

      “You see, madam, it’s a kind of omen,” explained Fedosya
      abruptly, in a shamefaced way.
    

      “Nonsense!” said Serafima Aleksandrovna.
    

      She did not wish to hear any further as to the sort of omen it was, and
      what it foreboded. But, somehow, a sense of fear and of sadness crept into
      her mood, and it was humiliating to feel that an absurd tale should
      disturb her beloved fancies, and should agitate her so deeply.
    

      “Of course I know that gentlefolk don’t believe in omens, but
      it’s a bad omen, madam,” Fedosya went on in a doleful voice,
      “the young lady will hide, and hide...”
    

      Suddenly she burst into tears, sobbing out loudly: “She’ll
      hide, and hide, and hide away, angelic little soul, in a damp grave,”
      she continued, as she wiped her tears with her apron and blew her nose.
    

      “Who told you all this?” asked Serafima Aleksandrovna in an
      austere low voice.
    

      “Agathya says so, madam,” answered Fedosya; “it’s
      she that knows.”
    

      “Knows!” exclaimed Serafima Aleksandrovna in irritation, as
      though she wished to protect herself somehow from this sudden anxiety.
      “What nonsense! Please don’t come to me with any such notions
      in the future. Now you may go.”
    

      Fedosya, dejected, her feelings hurt, left her mistress.
    

      “What nonsense! As though Lelechka could die!” thought
      Serafima Aleksandrovna to herself, trying to conquer the feeling of
      coldness and fear which took possession, of her at the thought of the
      possible death of Lelechka. Serafima Aleksandrovna, upon reflection,
      attributed these women’s beliefs in omens to ignorance. She saw
      clearly that there could be no possible connexion between a child’s
      quite ordinary diversion and the continuation of the child’s life.
      She made a special effort that evening to occupy her mind with other
      matters, but her thoughts returned involuntarily to the fact that Lelechka
      loved to hide herself.
    

      When Lelechka was still quite small, and had learned to distinguish
      between her mother and her nurse, she sometimes, sitting in her nurse’s
      arms, made a sudden roguish grimace, and hid her laughing face in the
      nurse’s shoulder. Then she would look out with a sly glance.
    

      Of late, in those rare moments of the mistress’ absence from the
      nursery, Fedosya had again taught Lelechka to hide; and when Lelechka’s
      mother, on coming in, saw how lovely the child looked when she was hiding,
      she herself began to play hide and seek with her tiny daughter.
    

      IV
    

The next day
      Serafima Aleksandrovna, absorbed in her joyous cares for Lelechka, had
      forgotten Fedosya’s words of the day before.
    

      But when she returned to the nursery, after having ordered the dinner, and
      she heard Lelechka suddenly cry “Tiu-tiu!” from under
      the table, a feeling of fear suddenly took hold of her. Though she
      reproached herself at once for this unfounded, superstitious dread,
      nevertheless she could not enter wholeheartedly into the spirit of
      Lelechka’s favourite game, and she tried to divert Lelechka’s
      attention to something else.
    

      Lelechka was a lovely and obedient child. She eagerly complied with her
      mother’s new wishes. But as she had got into the habit of hiding
      from her mother in some corner, and of crying out “Tiu-tiu!”
      so even that day she returned more than once to the game.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna tried desperately to amuse Lelechka. This was not
      so easy because restless, threatening thoughts obtruded themselves
      constantly.
    

      “Why does Lelechka keep on recalling the tiu-tiu? Why does
      she not get tired of the same thing—of eternally closing her eyes,
      and of hiding her face? Perhaps,” thought Serafima Aleksandrovna,
      “she is not as strongly drawn to the world as other children, who
      are attracted by many things. If this is so, is it not a sign of organic
      weakness? Is it not a germ of the unconscious non-desire to live?”
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna was tormented by presentiments. She felt ashamed of
      herself for ceasing to play hide and seek with Lelechka before Fedosya.
      But this game had become agonising to her, all the more agonising because
      she had a real desire to play it, and because something drew her very
      strongly to hide herself from Lelechka and to seek out the hiding child.
      Serafima Aleksandrovna herself began the game once or twice, though she
      played it with a heavy heart. She suffered as though committing an evil
      deed with full consciousness.
    

      It was a sad day for Serafima Aleksandrovna.
    











      V
    

      Lelechka was about to fall asleep. No sooner had she climbed into her
      little bed, protected by a network on all sides, than her eyes began to
      close from fatigue. Her mother covered her with a blue blanket. Lelechka
      drew her sweet little hands from under the blanket and stretched them out
      to embrace her mother. Her mother bent down. Lelechka, with a tender
      expression on her sleepy face, kissed her mother and let her head fall on
      the pillow. As her hands hid themselves under the blanket Lelechka
      whispered: “The hands tiu-tiu!”
    

      The mother’s heart seemed to stop—Lelechka lay there so small,
      so frail, so quiet. Lelechka smiled gently, closed her eyes and said
      quietly: “The eyes tiu-tiu!”
    

      Then even more quietly: “Lelechka tiu-tiu!”
    

      With these words she fell asleep, her face pressing the pillow. She seemed
      so small and so frail under the blanket that covered her. Her mother
      looked at her with sad eyes.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna remained standing over Lelechka’s bed a long
      while, and she kept looking at Lelechka with tenderness and fear.
    

      “I’m a mother: is it possible that I shouldn’t be able
      to protect her?” she thought, as she imagined the various ills that
      might befall Lelechka.
    

      She prayed long that night, but the prayer did not relieve her sadness.
    

      VI
    

Several days
      passed. Lelechka caught cold. The fever came upon her at night. When
      Serafima Aleksandrovna, awakened by Fedosya, came to Lelechka and saw her
      looking so hot, so restless, and so tormented, she instantly recalled the
      evil omen, and a hopeless despair took possession of her from the first
      moments.
    

      A doctor was called, and everything was done that is usual on such
      occasions—but the inevitable happened. Serafima Aleksandrovna tried
      to console herself with the hope that Lelechka would get well, and would
      again laugh and play—yet this seemed to her an unthinkable
      happiness! And Lelechka grew feebler from hour to hour.
    

      All simulated tranquillity, so as not to frighten Serafima Aleksandrovna,
      but their masked faces only made her sad.
    

      Nothing made her so unhappy as the reiterations of Fedosya, uttered
      between sobs: “She hid herself and hid herself, our Lelechka!”
    

      But the thoughts of Serafima Aleksandrovna were confused, and she could
      not quite grasp what was happening.
    

      Fever was consuming Lelechka, and there were times when she lost
      consciousness and spoke in delirium. But when she returned to herself she
      bore her pain and her fatigue with gentle good nature; she smiled feebly
      at her mamochka, so that her mamochka should not see how
      much she suffered. Three days passed, torturing like a nightmare. Lelechka
      grew quite feeble. She did not know that she was dying.
    

      She glanced at her mother with her dimmed eyes, and lisped in a scarcely
      audible, hoarse voice: “Tiu-tiu, mamochka! Make tiu-tiu,
      mamochka!”
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna hid her face behind the curtains near Lelechka’s
      bed. How tragic!
    

      “Mamochka!” called Lelechka in an almost inaudible
      voice.
    

      Lelechka’s mother bent over her, and Lelechka, her vision grown
      still more dim, saw her mother’s pale, despairing face for the last
      time.
    

      “A white mamochka!” whispered Lelechka.
    

Mamochka’s white face became blurred, and everything grew
      dark before Lelechka. She caught the edge of the bed-cover feebly with her
      hands and whispered: “Tiu-tiu!”
    

      Something rattled in her throat; Lelechka opened and again closed her
      rapidly paling lips, and died.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna was in dumb despair as she left Lelechka, and went
      out of the room. She met her husband.
    

      “Lelechka is dead,” she said in a quiet, dull voice.
    

      Sergey Modestovich looked anxiously at her pale face. He was struck by the
      strange stupor in her formerly animated handsome features.
    

      VII
    

Lelechka was
      dressed, placed in a little coffin, and carried into the parlour. Serafima
      Aleksandrovna was standing by the coffin and looking dully at her dead
      child. Sergey Modestovich went to his wife and, consoling her with cold,
      empty words, tried to draw her away from the coffin. Serafima
      Aleksandrovna smiled.
    

      “Go away,” she said quietly. “Lelechka is playing. She’ll
      be up in a minute.”
    

      “Sima, my dear, don’t agitate yourself,” said Sergey
      Modestovich in a whisper. “You must resign yourself to your fate.”
    

      “She’ll be up in a minute,” persisted Serafima
      Aleksandrovna, her eyes fixed on the dead little girl.
    

      Sergey Modestovich looked round him cautiously: he was afraid of the
      unseemly and of the ridiculous.
    

      “Sima, don’t agitate yourself,” he repeated. “This
      would be a miracle, and miracles do not happen in the nineteenth century.”
    

      No sooner had he said these words than Sergey Modestovich felt their
      irrelevance to what had happened. He was confused and annoyed.
    

      He took his wife by the arm, and cautiously led her away from the coffin.
      She did not oppose him.
    

      Her face seemed tranquil and her eyes were dry. She went into the nursery
      and began to walk round the room, looking into those places where Lelechka
      used to hide herself. She walked all about the room, and bent now and then
      to look under the table or under the bed, and kept on repeating
      cheerfully: “Where is my little one? Where is my Lelechka?”
    

      After she had walked round the room once she began to make her quest anew.
      Fedosya, motionless, with dejected face, sat in a corner, and looked
      frightened at her mistress; then she suddenly burst out sobbing, and she
      wailed loudly:
    

      “She hid herself, and hid herself, our Lelechka, our angelic little
      soul!”
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna trembled, paused, cast a perplexed look at Fedosya,
      began to weep, and left the nursery quietly.
    

      VIII
    

Sergey Modestovich
      hurried the funeral. He saw that Serafima Aleksandrovna was terribly
      shocked by her sudden misfortune, and as he feared for her reason he
      thought she would more readily be diverted and consoled when Lelechka was
      buried.
    

      Next morning Serafima Aleksandrovna dressed with particular care—for
      Lelechka. When she entered the parlour there were several people between
      her and Lelechka. The priest and deacon paced up and down the room; clouds
      of blue smoke drifted in the air, and there was a smell of incense. There
      was an oppressive feeling of heaviness in Serafima Aleksandrovna’s
      head as she approached Lelechka. Lelechka lay there still and pale, and
      smiled pathetically. Serafima Aleksandrovna laid her cheek upon the edge
      of Lelechka’s coffin, and whispered: “Tiu-tiu, little
      one!”
    

      The little one did not reply. Then there was some kind of stir and
      confusion around Serafima Aleksandrovna; strange, unnecessary faces bent
      over her, some one held her—and Lelechka was carried away somewhere.
    

      Serafima Aleksandrovna stood up erect, sighed in a lost way, smiled, and
      called loudly: “Lelechka!”
    

      Lelechka was being carried out. The mother threw herself after the coffin
      with despairing sobs, but she was held back. She sprang behind the door,
      through which Lelechka had passed, sat down there on the floor, and as she
      looked through the crevice, she cried out: “Lelechka, tiu-tiu!”
    

      Then she put her head out from behind the door, and began to laugh.
    

      Lelechka was quickly carried away from her mother, and those who carried
      her seemed to run rather than to walk.
    











      DETHRONED
    

      BY I.N. POTAPENKO
    

"Well?”
      Captain Zarubkin’s wife called out impatiently to her husband,
      rising from the sofa and turning to face him as he entered.
    

      “He doesn’t know anything about it,” he replied
      indifferently, as if the matter were of no interest to him. Then he asked
      in a businesslike tone: “Nothing for me from the office?”
    

      “Why should I know? Am I your errand boy?”
    

      “How they dilly-dally! If only the package doesn’t come too
      late. It’s so important!”
    

      “Idiot!”
    

      “Who’s an idiot?”
    

      “You, with your indifference, your stupid egoism.”
    

      The captain said nothing. He was neither surprised nor insulted. On the
      contrary, the smile on his face was as though he had received a
      compliment. These wifely animadversions, probably oft-heard, by no means
      interfered with his domestic peace.
    

      “It can’t be that the man doesn’t know when his wife is
      coming back home,” Mrs. Zarubkin continued excitedly. “She’s
      written to him every day of the four months that she’s been away.
      The postmaster told me so.”
    

      “Semyonov! Ho, Semyonov! Has any one from the office been here?”
    

      “I don’t know, your Excellency,” came in a loud, clear
      voice from back of the room.
    

      “Why don’t you know? Where have you been?”
    

      “I went to Abramka, your Excellency.”
    

      “The tailor again?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency, the tailor Abramka.”
    

      The captain spat in annoyance.
    

      “And where is Krynka?”
    

      “He went to market, your Excellency.”
    

      “Was he told to go to market?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      The captain spat again.
    

      “Why do you keep spitting? Such vulgar manners!” his wife
      cried angrily. “You behave at home like a drunken subaltern. You
      haven’t the least consideration for your wife. You are so coarse in
      your behaviour towards me! Do, please, go to your office.”
    

      “Semyonov.”
    

      “Your Excellency?”
    

      “If the package comes, please have it sent back to the office and
      say I’ve gone there. And listen! Some one must always be here. I won’t
      have everybody out of the house at the same time. Do you hear?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      The captain put on his cap to go. In the doorway he turned and addressed
      his wife.
    

      “Please, Tasya, please don’t send all the servants on your
      errands at the same time. Something important may turn up, and then there’s
      nobody here to attend to it.”
    

      He went out, and his wife remained reclining in the sofa corner as if his
      plea were no concern of hers. But scarcely had he left the house, when she
      called out:
    

      “Semyonov, come here. Quick!”
    

      A bare-footed unshaven man in dark blue pantaloons and cotton shirt
      presented himself. His stocky figure and red face made a wholesome
      appearance. He was the Captain’s orderly.
    

      “At your service, your Excellency.”
    

      “Listen, Semyonov, you don’t seem to be stupid.”
    

      “I don’t know, your Excellency.”
    

      “For goodness’ sake, drop ‘your Excellency.’ I am
      not your superior officer.”
    

      “Yes, your Excel—”
    

      “Idiot!”
    

      But the lady’s manner toward the servant was far friendlier than
      toward her husband. Semyonov had it in his power to perform important
      services for her, while the captain had not come up to her expectations.
    

      “Listen, Semyonov, how do you and the doctor’s men get along
      together? Are you friendly?”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      “Intolerable!” cried the lady, jumping up. “Stop using
      that silly title. Can’t you speak like a sensible man?”
    

      Semyonov had been standing in the stiff attitude of attention, with the
      palms of his hands at the seams of his trousers. Now he suddenly relaxed,
      and even wiped his nose with his fist.
    

      “That’s the way we are taught to do,” he said
      carelessly, with a clownish grin. “The gentlemen, the officers,
      insist on it.”
    

      “Now, tell me, you are on good terms with the doctor’s men?”
    

      “You mean Podmar and Shuchok? Of course, we’re friends.”
    

      “Very well, then go straight to them and try to find out when Mrs.
      Shaldin is expected back. They ought to know. They must be getting things
      ready against her return—cleaning her bedroom and fixing it up. Do
      you understand? But be careful to find out right. And also be very careful
      not to let on for whom you are finding it out. Do you understand?’
    

      “Of course, I understand.”
    

      “Well, then, go. But one more thing. Since you’re going out,
      you may as well stop at Abramka’s again and tell him to come here
      right away. You understand?”
    

      “But his Excellency gave me orders to stay at home,” said
      Semyonov, scratching himself behind his ears.
    

      “Please don’t answer back. Just do as I tell you. Go on, now.”
    

      “At your service.” And the orderly, impressed by the lady’s
      severe military tone, left the room.
    

      Mrs. Zarubkin remained reclining on the sofa for a while. Then she rose
      and walked up and down the room and finally went to her bedroom, where her
      two little daughters were playing in their nurse’s care. She scolded
      them a bit and returned to her former place on the couch. Her every
      movement betrayed great excitement.
    








      Tatyana Grigoryevna Zarubkin was one of the most looked-up to ladies of
      the S—— Regiment and even of the whole town of Chmyrsk, where
      the regiment was quartered. To be sure, you hardly could say that, outside
      the regiment, the town could boast any ladies at all. There were very
      respectable women, decent wives, mothers, daughters and widows of
      honourable citizens; but they all dressed in cotton and flannel, and on
      high holidays made a show of cheap Cashmere gowns over which they wore gay
      shawls with borders of wonderful arabesques. Their hats and other headgear
      gave not the faintest evidence of good taste. So they could scarcely be
      dubbed “ladies.” They were satisfied to be called “women.”
      Each one of them, almost, had the name of her husband’s trade or
      position tacked to her name—Mrs. Grocer so-and-so, Mrs. Mayor
      so-and-so, Mrs. Milliner so-and-so, etc. Genuine ladies in the
      Russian society sense had never come to the town before the S——
      Regiment had taken up its quarters there; and it goes without saying that
      the ladies of the regiment had nothing in common, and therefore no
      intercourse with, the women of the town. They were so dissimilar that they
      were like creatures of a different species.
    

      There is no disputing that Tatyana Grigoryevna Zarubkin was one of the
      most looked-up-to of the ladies. She invariably played the most important
      part at all the regimental affairs—the amateur theatricals, the
      social evenings, the afternoon teas. If the captain’s wife was not
      to be present, it was a foregone conclusion that the affair would not be a
      success.
    

      The most important point was that Mrs. Zarubkin had the untarnished
      reputation of being the best-dressed of all the ladies. She was always the
      most distinguished looking at the annual ball. Her gown for the occasion,
      ordered from Moscow, was always chosen with the greatest regard for her
      charms and defects, and it was always exquisitely beautiful. A new fashion
      could not gain admittance to the other ladies of the regiment except by
      way of the captain’s wife. Thanks to her good taste in dressing, the
      stately blonde was queen at all the balls and in all the salons of
      Chmyrsk. Another advantage of hers was that although she was nearly forty
      she still looked fresh and youthful, so that the young officers were
      constantly hovering about her and paying her homage.
    

      November was a very lively month in the regiment’s calendar. It was
      on the tenth of November that the annual ball took place. The ladies, of
      course, spent their best efforts in preparation for this event. Needless
      to say that in these arduous activities, Abramka Stiftik, the ladies’
      tailor, played a prominent role. He was the one man in Chmyrsk who had any
      understanding at all for the subtle art of the feminine toilet.
      Preparations had begun in his shop in August already. Within the last
      weeks his modest parlour—furnished with six shabby chairs placed
      about a round table, and a fly-specked mirror on the wall—the
      atmosphere heavy with a smell of onions and herring, had been filled from
      early morning to the evening hours with the most charming and elegant of
      the fairer sex. There was trying-on and discussion of styles and selection
      of material. It was all very nerve-racking for the ladies.
    

      The only one who had never appeared in this parlour was the captain’s
      wife. That had been a thorn in Abramka’s flesh. He had spent days
      and nights going over in his mind how he could rid this lady of the, in
      his opinion, wretched habit of ordering her clothes from Moscow. For this
      ball, however, as she herself had told him, she had not ordered a dress
      but only material from out of town, from which he deduced that he was to
      make the gown for her. But there was only one week left before the ball,
      and still she had not come to him. Abramka was in a state of feverishness.
      He longed once to make a dress for Mrs. Zarubkin. It would add to his
      glory. He wanted to prove that he understood his trade just as well as any
      tailor in Moscow, and that it was quite superfluous for her to order her
      gowns outside of Chmyrsk. He would come out the triumphant competitor of
      Moscow.
    

      As each day passed and Mrs. Zarubkin did not appear in his shop, his
      nervousness increased. Finally she ordered a dressing-jacket from him—but
      not a word said of a ball gown. What was he to think of it?
    

      So, when Semyonov told him that Mrs. Zarubkin was expecting him at her
      home, it goes without saying that he instantly removed the dozen pins in
      his mouth, as he was trying on a customer’s dress, told one of his
      assistants to continue with the fitting, and instantly set off to call on
      the captain’s wife. In this case, it was not a question of a mere
      ball gown, but of the acquisition of the best customer in town.
    

      Although Abramka wore a silk hat and a suit in keeping with the silk hat,
      still he was careful not to ring at the front entrance, but always knocked
      at the back door. At another time when the captain’s orderly was not
      in the house—for the captain’s orderly also performed the
      duties of the captain’s cook—he might have knocked long and
      loud. On other occasions a cannon might have been shot off right next to
      Tatyana Grigoryevna’s ears and she would not have lifted her fingers
      to open the door. But now she instantly caught the sound of the modest
      knocking and opened the back door herself for Abramka.
    

      “Oh!” she cried delightedly. “You, Abramka!”
    

      She really wanted to address him less familiarly, as was more befitting so
      dignified a man in a silk hat; but everybody called him “Abramka,”
      and he would have been very much surprised had he been honoured with his
      full name, Abram Srulevich Stiftik. So she thought it best to address him
      as the others did.
    

      Mr. “Abramka” was tall and thin. There was always a melancholy
      expression in his pale face. He had a little stoop, a long and very heavy
      greyish beard. He had been practising his profession for thirty years.
      Ever since his apprenticeship he had been called “Abramka,”
      which did not strike him as at all derogatory or unfitting. Even his
      shingle read: “Ladies’ Tailor: Abramka Stiftik”—the
      most valid proof that he deemed his name immaterial, but that the chief
      thing to him was his art. As a matter of fact, he had attained, if not
      perfection in tailoring, yet remarkable skill. To this all the ladies of
      the S—— Regiment could attest with conviction.
    

      Abramka removed his silk hat, stepped into the kitchen, and said gravely,
      with profound feeling:
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin, I am entirely at your service.”
    

      “Come into the reception room. I have something very important to
      speak to you about.”
    

      Abramka followed in silence. He stepped softly on tiptoe, as if afraid of
      waking some one.
    

      “Sit down, Abramka, listen—but give me your word of honour,
      you won’t tell any one?” Tatyana Grigoryevna began, reddening
      a bit. She was ashamed to have to let the tailor Abramka into her secret,
      but since there was no getting around it, she quieted herself and in an
      instant had regained her ease.
    

      “I don’t know what you are speaking of, Mrs. Zarubkin,”
      Abramka rejoined. He assumed a somewhat injured manner. “Have you
      ever heard of Abramka ever babbling anything out? You certainly know that
      in my profession—you know everybody has some secret to be kept.”
    

      “Oh, you must have misunderstood me, Abramka. What sort of secrets
      do you mean?”
    

      “Well, one lady is a little bit one-sided, another lady”—he
      pointed to his breast—“is not quite full enough, another lady
      has scrawny arms—such things as that have to be covered up or filled
      out or laced in, so as to look better. That is where our art comes in. But
      we are in duty bound not to say anything about it.”
    

      Tatyana Grigoryevna smiled.
    

      “Well, I can assure you I am all right that way. There is nothing
      about me that needs to be covered up or filled out.”
    

      “Oh, as if I didn’t know that! Everybody knows that Mrs.
      Zarubkin’s figure is perfect,” Abramka cried, trying to
      flatter his new customer.
    

      Mrs. Zarubkin laughed and made up her mind to remember “Everybody
      knows that Mrs. Zarubkin’s figure is perfect.” Then she said:
    

      “You know that the ball is to take place in a week.”
    

      “Yes, indeed, Mrs. Zarubkin, in only one week; unfortunately, only
      one week,” replied Abramka, sighing.
    

      “But you remember your promise to make my dress for me for the ball
      this time?”
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin,” Abramka cried, laying his hand on his heart.
      “Have I said that I was not willing to make it? No, indeed, I said
      it must be made and made right—for Mrs. Zarubkin, it must be better
      than for any one else. That’s the way I feel about it.”
    

      “Splendid! Just what I wanted to know.”
    

      “But why don’t you show me your material? Why don’t you
      say to me, 'Here, Abramka, here is the stuff, make a dress?’ Abramka
      would work on it day and night.”
    

      “Ahem, that’s just it—I can’t order it. That is
      where the trouble comes in. Tell me, Abramka, what is the shortest time
      you need for making the dress? Listen, the very shortest?”
    

      Abramka shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “Well, is a week too much for a ball dress such as you will want? It’s
      got to be sewed, it can’t be pasted together, You, yourself, know
      that, Mrs. Zarubkin.”
    

      “But supposing I order it only three days before the ball?”
    

      Abramka started.
    

      “Only three days before the ball? A ball dress? Am I a god, Mrs.
      Zarubkin? I am nothing but the ladies’ tailor, Abramka Stiftik.”
    

      “Well, then you are a nice tailor!” said Tatyana Grigoryevna,
      scornfully. “In Moscow they made a ball dress for me in two days.”
    

      Abramka jumped up as if at a shot, and beat his breast.
    

      “Is that so? Then I say, Mrs. Zarubkin,” he cried
      pathetically, “if they made a ball gown for you in Moscow in two
      days, very well, then I will make a ball gown for you, if I must, in one
      day. I will neither eat nor sleep, and I won’t let my help off
      either for one minute. How does that suit you?”
    

      “Sit down, Abramka, thank you very much. I hope I shall not have to
      put such a strain on you. It really does not depend upon me, otherwise I
      should have ordered the dress from you long ago.”
    

      “It doesn’t depend upon you? Then upon whom does it depend?”
    

      “Ahem, it depends upon—but now, Abramka, remember this is just
      between you and me—it depends upon Mrs. Shaldin.”
    

      “Upon Mrs. Shaldin, the doctor’s wife? Why she isn’t
      even here.”
    

      “That’s just it. That is why I have to wait. How is it that a
      clever man like you, Abramka, doesn’t grasp the situation?”
    

      “Hm, hm! Let me see.” Abramka racked his brains for a solution
      of the riddle. How could it be that Mrs. Shaldin, who was away, should
      have anything to do with Mrs. Zarubkin’s order for a gown? No, that
      passed his comprehension.
    

      “She certainly will get back in time for the ball,” said Mrs.
      Zarubkin, to give him a cue.
    

      “Well, yes.”
    

      “And certainly will bring a dress back with her.”
    

      “Certainly!”
    

      “A dress from abroad, something we have never seen here—something
      highly original.”
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin!” Abramka cried, as if a truth of tremendous
      import had been revealed to him. “Mrs. Zarubkin, I understand. Why
      certainly! Yes, but that will be pretty hard.”
    

      “That’s just it.”
    

      Abramka reflected a moment, then said:
    

      “I assure you, Mrs. Zarubkin, you need not be a bit uneasy. I will
      make a dress for you that will be just as grand as the one from abroad. I
      assure you, your dress will be the most elegant one at the ball, just as
      it always has been. I tell you, my name won’t be Abramka Stiftik if—”
    

      His eager asseverations seemed not quite to satisfy the captain’s
      wife. Her mind was not quite set at ease. She interrupted him.
    

      “But the style, Abramka, the style! You can’t possibly guess
      what the latest fashion is abroad.”
    

      “Why shouldn’t I know what the latest fashion is, Mrs.
      Zarubkin? In Kiev I have a friend who publishes fashion-plates. I will
      telegraph to him, and he will immediately send me pictures of the latest
      French models. The telegram will cost only eighty cents, Mrs. Zarubkin,
      and I swear to you I will copy any dress he sends. Mrs. Shaldin can’t
      possibly have a dress like that.”
    

      “All very well and good, and that’s what we’ll do. Still
      we must wait until Mrs. Shaldin comes back. Don’t you see, Abramka,
      I must have exactly the same style that she has? Can’t you see, so
      that nobody can say that she is in the latest fashion?”
    

      At this point Semyonov entered the room cautiously. He was wearing the
      oddest-looking jacket and the captain’s old boots. His hair was
      rumpled, and his eyes were shining suspiciously. There was every sign that
      he had used the renewal of friendship with the doctor’s men as a
      pretext for a booze.
    

      “I had to stand them some brandy, your Excellency,” he said
      saucily, but catching his mistress’s threatening look, he lowered
      his head guiltily.
    

      “Idiot,” she yelled at him, “face about. Be off with you
      to the kitchen.”
    

      In his befuddlement, Semyonov had not noticed Abramka’s presence.
      Now he became aware of him, faced about and retired to the kitchen
      sheepishly.
    

      “What an impolite fellow,” said Abramka reproachfully.
    

      “Oh, you wouldn’t believe—” said the captain’s
      wife, but instantly followed Semyonov into the kitchen.
    

      Semyonov aware of his awful misdemeanour, tried to stand up straight and
      give a report.
    

      “She will come back, your Excellency, day after to-morrow toward
      evening. She sent a telegram.”
    

      “Is that true now?”
    

      “I swear it’s true. Shuchok saw it himself.”
    

      “All right, very good. You will get something for this.”
    

      “Yes, your Excellency.”
    

      “Silence, you goose. Go on, set the table.”
    

      Abramka remained about ten minutes longer with the captain’s wife,
      and on leaving said:
    

      “Let me assure you once again, Mrs. Zarubkin, you needn’t
      worry; just select the style, and I will make a gown for you that the best
      tailor in Paris can’t beat.” He pressed his hand to his heart
      in token of his intention to do everything in his power for Mrs. Zarubkin.
    








      It was seven o’clock in the evening. Mrs. Shaldin and her trunk had
      arrived hardly half an hour before, yet the captain’s wife was
      already there paying visit; which was a sign of the warm friendship that
      existed between the two women. They kissed each other and fell to talking.
      The doctor, a tall man of forty-five, seemed discomfited by the visit, and
      passed unfriendly side glances at his guest. He had hoped to spend that
      evening undisturbed with his wife, and he well knew that when the ladies
      of the regiment came to call upon each other “for only a second,”
      it meant a whole evening of listening to idle talk.
    

      “You wouldn’t believe me, dear, how bored I was the whole time
      you were away, how I longed for you, Natalie Semyonovna. But you probably
      never gave us a thought.”
    

      “Oh, how can you say anything like that. I was thinking of you every
      minute, every second. If I hadn’t been obliged to finish the cure, I
      should have returned long ago. No matter how beautiful it may be away from
      home, still the only place to live is among those that are near and dear
      to you.”
    

      These were only the preliminary soundings. They lasted with variations for
      a quarter of an hour. First Mrs. Shaldin narrated a few incidents of the
      trip, then Mrs. Zarubkin gave a report of some of the chief happenings in
      the life of the regiment. When the conversation was in full swing, and the
      samovar was singing on the table, and the pancakes were spreading their
      appetising odour, the captain’s wife suddenly cried:
    

      “I wonder what the fashions are abroad now. I say, you must have
      feasted your eyes on them!”
    

      Mrs. Shaldin simply replied with a scornful gesture.
    

      “Other people may like them, but I don’t care for them one
      bit. I am glad we here don’t get to see them until a year later. You
      know, Tatyana Grigoryevna, you sometimes see the ugliest styles.”
    

      “Really?” asked the captain’s wife eagerly, her eyes
      gleaming with curiosity. The great moment of complete revelation seemed to
      have arrived.
    

      “Perfectly hideous, I tell you. Just imagine, you know how nice the
      plain skirts were. Then why change them? But no, to be in style now, the
      skirts have to be draped. Why? It is just a sign of complete lack of
      imagination. And in Lyons they got out a new kind of silk—but that
      is still a French secret.”
    

      “Why a secret? The silk is certainly being worn already?”
    

      “Yes, one does see it being worn already, but when it was first
      manufactured, the greatest secret was made of it. They were afraid the
      Germans would imitate. You understand?”
    

      “Oh, but what is the latest style?”
    

      “I really can’t explain it to you. All I know is, it is
      something awful.”
    

      “She can’t explain! That means she doesn’t want to
      explain. Oh, the cunning one. What a sly look she has in her eyes.”
      So thought the captain’s wife. From the very beginning of the
      conversation, the two warm friends, it need scarcely be said, were
      mutually distrustful. Each had the conviction that everything the other
      said was to be taken in the very opposite sense. They were of about the
      same age, Mrs. Shaldin possibly one or two years younger than Mrs.
      Zarubkin. Mrs. Zarubkin was rather plump, and had heavy light hair. Her
      appearance was blooming. Mrs. Shaldin was slim, though well proportioned.
      She was a brunette with a pale complexion and large dark eyes. They were
      two types of beauty very likely to divide the gentlemen of the regiment
      into two camps of admirers. But women are never content with halves. Mrs.
      Zarubkin wanted to see all the officers of the regiment at her feet, and
      so did Mrs. Shaldin. It naturally led to great rivalry between the two
      women, of which they were both conscious, though they always had the
      friendliest smiles for each other.
    

      Mrs. Shaldin tried to give a different turn to the conversation.
    

      “Do you think the ball will be interesting this year?”
    

      “Why should it be interesting?” rejoined the captain’s
      wife scornfully. “Always the same people, the same old humdrum
      jog-trot.”
    

      “I suppose the ladies have been besieging our poor Abramka?”
    

      “I really can’t tell you. So far as I am concerned, I have
      scarcely looked at what he made for me.”
    

      “Hm, how’s that? Didn’t you order your dress from Moscow
      again?”
    

      “No, it really does not pay. I am sick of the bother of it all. Why
      all that trouble? For whom? Our officers don’t care a bit how one
      dresses. They haven’t the least taste.”
    

      “Hm, there’s something back of that,” thought Mrs.
      Shaldin.
    

      The captain’s wife continued with apparent indifference:
    

      “I can guess what a gorgeous dress you had made abroad. Certainly in
      the latest fashion?”
    

      “I?” Mrs. Shaldin laughed innocently. “How could I get
      the time during my cure to think of a dress? As a matter of fact, I
      completely forgot the ball, thought of it at the last moment, and bought
      the first piece of goods I laid my hands on.”
    

      “Pink?”
    

      “Oh, no. How can you say pink!”
    

      “Light blue, then?”
    

      “You can’t call it exactly light blue. It is a very undefined
      sort of colour. I really wouldn’t know what to call it.”
    

      “But it certainly must have some sort of a shade?”
    

      “You may believe me or not if you choose, but really I don’t
      know. It’s a very indefinite shade.”
    

      “Is it Sura silk?”
    

      “No, I can’t bear Sura. It doesn’t keep the folds well.”
    

      “I suppose it is crÃªpe de Chine?”
    

      “Heavens, no! CrÃªpe de Chine is much too expensive for me.”
    

      “Then what can it be?”
    

      “Oh, wait a minute, what is the name of that goods? You know
      there are so many funny new names now. They don’t make any sense.”
    

      “Then show me your dress, dearest. Do please show me your dress.”
    

      Mrs. Shaldin seemed to be highly embarrassed.
    

      “I am so sorry I can’t. It is way down at the bottom of the
      trunk. There is the trunk. You see yourself I couldn’t unpack it
      now.”
    

      The trunk, close to the wall, was covered with oil cloth and tied tight
      with heavy cords. The captain’s wife devoured it with her eyes. She
      would have liked to see through and through it. She had nothing to say in
      reply, because it certainly was impossible to ask her friend, tired out
      from her recent journey, to begin to unpack right away and take out all
      her things just to show her her new dress. Yet she could not tear her eyes
      away from the trunk. There was a magic in it that held her enthralled. Had
      she been alone she would have begun to unpack it herself, nor even have
      asked the help of a servant to undo the knots. Now there was nothing left
      for her but to turn her eyes sorrowfully away from the fascinating object
      and take up another topic of conversation to which she would be utterly
      indifferent. But she couldn’t think of anything else to talk about.
      Mrs. Shaldin must have prepared herself beforehand. She must have
      suspected something. So now Mrs. Zarubkin pinned her last hope to Abramka’s
      inventiveness. She glanced at the clock.
    

      “Dear me,” she exclaimed, as if surprised at the lateness of
      the hour. “I must be going. I don’t want to disturb you any
      longer either, dearest. You must be very tired. I hope you rest well.”
    

      She shook hands with Mrs. Shaldin, kissed her and left.
    








      Abramka Stiftik had just taken off his coat and was doing some ironing in
      his shirt sleeves, when a peculiar figure appeared in his shop. It was
      that of a stocky orderly in a well-worn uniform without buttons and old
      galoshes instead of boots. His face was gloomy-looking and was covered
      with a heavy growth of hair. Abramka knew this figure well. It seemed
      always just to have been awakened from the deepest sleep.
    

      “Ah, Shuchok, what do you want?”
    

      “Mrs. Shaldin would like you to call upon her,” said Shuchok.
      He behaved as if he had come on a terribly serious mission.
    

      “Ah, that’s so, your lady has come back. I heard about it. You
      see I am very busy. Still you may tell her I am coming right away. I just
      want to finish ironing Mrs. Konopotkin’s dress.”
    

      Abramka simply wanted to keep up appearances, as always when he was sent
      for. But his joy at the summons to Mrs. Shaldin was so great that to the
      astonishment of his helpers and Shuchok he left immediately.
    

      He found Mrs. Shaldin alone. She had not slept well the two nights before
      and had risen late that morning. Her husband had left long before for the
      Military Hospital. She was sitting beside her open trunk taking her things
      out very carefully.
    

      “How do you do, Mrs. Shaldin? Welcome back to Chmyrsk. I
      congratulate you on your happy arrival.”
    

      “Oh, how do you do, Abramka?” said Mrs. Shaldin delightedly;
      “we haven’t seen each other for a long time, have we? I was
      rather homesick for you.”
    

      “Oh, Mrs. Shaldin, you must have had a very good time abroad. But
      what do you need me for? You certainly brought a dress back with you?”
    

      “Abramka always comes in handy,” said Mrs. Shaldin jestingly.
      “We ladies of the regiment are quite helpless without Abramka. Take
      a seat.”
    

      Abramka seated himself. He felt much more at ease in Mrs. Shaldin’s
      home than in Mrs. Zarubkin’s. Mrs. Shaldin did not order her clothes
      from Moscow. She was a steady customer of his. In this room he had many a
      time circled about the doctor’s wife with a yard measure, pins,
      chalk and scissors, had kneeled down beside her, raised himself to his
      feet, bent over again and stood puzzling over some difficult problem of
      dressmaking—how low to cut the dress out at the neck, how long to
      make the train, how wide the hem, and so on. None of the ladies of the
      regiment ordered as much from him as Mrs. Shaldin. Her grandmother would
      send her material from Kiev or the doctor would go on a professional trip
      to Chernigov and always bring some goods back with him; or sometimes her
      aunt in Voronesh would make her a gift of some silk.
    

      “Abramka is always ready to serve Mrs. Shaldin first,” said
      the tailor, though seized with a little pang, as if bitten by a guilty
      conscience.
    

      “Are you sure you are telling the truth? Is Abramka always to be
      depended upon? Eh, is he?” She looked at him searchingly from
      beneath drooping lids.
    

      “What a question,” rejoined Abramka. His face quivered
      slightly. His feeling of discomfort was waxing. “Has Abramka ever—”
    

      “Oh, things can happen. But, all right, never mind. I brought a
      dress along with me. I had to have it made in a great hurry, and there is
      just a little more to be done on it. Now if I give you this dress to
      finish, can I be sure that you positively won’t tell another soul
      how it is made?”
    

      “Mrs. Shaldin, oh, Mrs. Shaldin,” said Abramka reproachfully.
      Nevertheless, the expression of his face was not so reassuring as usual.
    

      “You give me your word of honour?”
    

      “Certainly! My name isn’t Abramka Stiftik if I—”
    

      “Well, all right, I will trust you. But be careful. You know of whom
      you must be careful?”
    

      “Who is that, Mrs. Shaldin?”
    

      “Oh, you know very well whom I mean. No, you needn’t put your
      hand on your heart. She was here to see me yesterday and tried in every
      way she could to find out how my dress is made. But she couldn’t get
      it out of me.” Abramka sighed. Mrs. Shaldin seemed to suspect his
      betrayal. “I am right, am I not? She has not had her dress made yet,
      has she? She waited to see my dress, didn’t she? And she told you to
      copy the style, didn’t she?” Mrs, Shaldin asked with honest
      naÃ¯vetÃ©. “But I warn you, Abramka, if you give away the least little
      thing about my dress, then all is over between you and me. Remember that.”
    

      Abramka’s hand went to his heart again, and the gesture carried the
      same sense of conviction as of old.
    

      “Mrs. Shaldin, how can you speak like that?”
    

      “Wait a moment.”
    

      Mrs. Shaldin left the room. About ten minutes passed during which Abramka
      had plenty of time to reflect. How could he have given the captain’s
      wife a promise like that so lightly? What was the captain’s wife to
      him as compared with the doctor’s wife? Mrs. Zarubkin had never
      given him a really decent order—just a few things for the house and
      some mending. Supposing he were now to perform this great service for her,
      would that mean that he could depend upon her for the future? Was any
      woman to be depended upon? She would wear this dress out and go back to
      ordering her clothes from Moscow again. But Mrs. Shaldin, she was
      very different. He could forgive her having brought this one dress along
      from abroad. What woman in Russia would have refrained, when abroad, from
      buying a new dress? Mrs. Shaldin would continue to be his steady customer
      all the same.
    

      The door opened. Abramka rose involuntarily, and clasped his hands in
      astonishment.
    

      “Well,” he exclaimed rapturously, “that is a dress, that
      is—My, my!” He was so stunned he could find nothing more to
      say. And how charming Mrs. Shaldin looked in her wonderful gown! Her tall
      slim figure seemed to have been made for it. What simple yet elegant
      lines. At first glance you would think it was nothing more than an
      ordinary house-gown, but only at first glance. If you looked at it again,
      you could tell right away that it met all the requirements of a fancy
      ball-gown. What struck Abramka most was that it had no waist line, that it
      did not consist of bodice and skirt. That was strange. It was just caught
      lightly together under the bosom, which it brought out in relief. Draped
      over the whole was a sort of upper garment of exquisite old-rose lace
      embroidered with large silk flowers, which fell from the shoulders and
      broadened out in bold superb lines. The dress was cut low and edged with a
      narrow strip of black down around the bosom, around the bottom of the lace
      drapery, and around the hem of the skirt. A wonderful fan of feathers to
      match the down edging gave the finishing touch.
    

      “Well, how do you like it, Abramka!” asked Mrs. Shaldin with a
      triumphant smile.
    

      “Glorious, glorious! I haven’t the words at my command. What a
      dress! No, I couldn’t make a dress like that. And how beautifully it
      fits you, as if you had been born in it, Mrs. Shaldin. What do you call
      the style?”
    

      “Empire.”
    

      “Ampeer?” he queried. “Is that a new style? Well, well,
      what people don’t think of. Tailors like us might just as well throw
      our needles and scissors away.”
    

      “Now, listen, Abramka, I wouldn’t have shown it to you if
      there were not this sewing to be done on it. You are the only one who will
      have seen it before the ball. I am not even letting my husband look at it.”
    

      “Oh, Mrs. Shaldin, you can rely upon me as upon a rock. But after
      the ball may I copy it?”
    

      “Oh, yes, after the ball copy it as much as you please, but not now,
      not for anything in the world.”
    

      There were no doubts in Abramka’s mind when he left the doctor’s
      house. He had arrived at his decision. That superb creation had conquered
      him. It would be a piece of audacity on his part, he felt, even to think
      of imitating such a gown. Why, it was not a gown. It was a dream, a
      fantastic vision—without a bodice, without puffs or frills or tawdry
      trimmings of any sort. Simplicity itself and yet so chic.
    

      Back in his shop he opened the package of fashion-plates that had just
      arrived from Kiev. He turned the pages and stared in astonishment. What
      was that? Could he trust his eyes? An Empire gown. There it was, with the
      broad voluptuous drapery of lace hanging from the shoulders and the edging
      of down. Almost exactly the same thing as Mrs. Shaldin’s.
    

      He glanced up and saw Semyonov outside the window. He had certainly come
      to fetch him to the captain’s wife, who must have ordered him to
      watch the tailor’s movements, and must have learned that he had just
      been at Mrs. Shaldin’s. Semyonov entered and told him his mistress
      wanted to see him right away.
    

      Abramka slammed the fashion magazine shut as if afraid that Semyonov might
      catch a glimpse of the new Empire fashion and give the secret away.
    

      “I will come immediately,” he said crossly.
    

      He picked up his fashion plates, put the yard measure in his pocket,
      rammed his silk hat sorrowfully on his head and set off for the captain’s
      house. He found Mrs. Zarubkin pacing the room excitedly, greeted her, but
      carefully avoided meeting her eyes.
    

      “Well, what did you find out?”
    

      “Nothing, Mrs. Zarubkin,” said Abramka dejectedly. “Unfortunately
      I couldn’t find out a thing.”
    

      “Idiot! I have no patience with you. Where are the fashion plates?”
    

      “Here, Mrs. Zarubkin.”
    

      She turned the pages, looked at one picture after the other, and suddenly
      her eyes shone and her cheeks reddened.
    

      “Oh, Empire! The very thing. Empire is the very latest. Make this
      one for me,” she cried commandingly.
    

      Abramka turned pale.
    

      “Ampeer, Mrs. Zarubkin? I can’t make that Ampeer dress for
      you,” he murmured.
    

      “Why not?” asked the captain’s wife, giving him a
      searching look.
    

      “Because—because—I can’t.”
    

      “Oh—h—h, you can’t? You know why you can’t.
      Because that is the style of Mrs. Shaldin’s dress. So that is the
      reliability you boast so about? Great!”
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin, I will make any other dress you choose, but it is
      absolutely impossible for me to make this one.”
    

      “I don’t need your fashion plates, do you hear me? Get out of
      here, and don’t ever show your face again.”
    

      “Mrs. Zarubkin, I—”
    

      “Get out of here,” repeated the captain’s wife, quite
      beside herself.
    

      The poor tailor stuck his yard measure, which he had already taken out,
      back into his pocket and left.
    

      Half an hour later the captain’s wife was entering a train for Kiev,
      carrying a large package which contained material for a dress. The captain
      had accompanied her to the station with a pucker in his forehead. That was
      five days before the ball.
    








      At the ball two expensive Empire gowns stood out conspicuously from among
      the more or less elegant gowns which had been finished in the shop of
      Abramka Stiftik, Ladies’ Tailor. The one gown adorned Mrs. Shaldin’s
      figure, the other the figure of the captain’s wife.
    

      Mrs. Zarubkin had bought her gown ready made at Kiev, and had returned
      only two hours before the beginning of the ball. She had scarcely had time
      to dress. Perhaps it would have been better had she not appeared at this
      one of the annual balls, had she not taken that fateful trip to Kiev. For
      in comparison with the make and style of Mrs. Shaldin’s dress, which
      had been brought abroad, hers was like the botched imitation of an
      amateur.
    

      That was evident to everybody, though the captain’s wife had her
      little group of partisans, who maintained with exaggerated eagerness that
      she looked extraordinarily fascinating in her dress and Mrs. Shaldin still
      could not rival her. But there was no mistaking it, there was little
      justice in this contention. Everybody knew better; what was worst of all,
      Mrs. Zarubkin herself knew better. Mrs. Shaldin’s triumph was
      complete.
    

      The two ladies gave each other the same friendly smiles as always, but one
      of them was experiencing the fine disdain and the derision of the
      conqueror, while the other was burning inside with the furious resentment
      of a dethroned goddess—goddess of the annual ball.
    

      From that time on Abramka cautiously avoided passing the captain’s
      house.
    











      THE SERVANT
    

      BY S.T. SEMYONOV
    

      I
    

Gerasim returned to
      Moscow just at a time when it was hardest to find work, a short while
      before Christmas, when a man sticks even to a poor job in the expectation
      of a present. For three weeks the peasant lad had been going about in vain
      seeking a position.
    

      He stayed with relatives and friends from his village, and although he had
      not yet suffered great want, it disheartened him that he, a strong young
      man, should go without work.
    

      Gerasim had lived in Moscow from early boyhood. When still a mere child,
      he had gone to work in a brewery as bottle-washer, and later as a lower
      servant in a house. In the last two years he had been in a merchant’s
      employ, and would still have held that position, had he not been summoned
      back to his village for military duty. However, he had not been drafted.
      It seemed dull to him in the village, he was not used to the country life,
      so he decided he would rather count the stones in Moscow than stay there.
    

      Every minute it was getting to be more and more irk-some for him to be
      tramping the streets in idleness. Not a stone did he leave unturned in his
      efforts to secure any sort of work. He plagued all of his acquaintances,
      he even held up people on the street and asked them if they knew of a
      situation—all in vain.
    

      Finally Gerasim could no longer bear being a burden on his people. Some of
      them were annoyed by his coming to them; and others had suffered
      unpleasantness from their masters on his account. He was altogether at a
      loss what to do. Sometimes he would go a whole day without eating.
    

      II
    

One day Gerasim
      betook himself to a friend from his village, who lived at the extreme
      outer edge of Moscow, near Sokolnik. The man was coachman to a merchant by
      the name of Sharov, in whose service he had been for many years. He had
      ingratiated himself with his master, so that Sharov trusted him absolutely
      and gave every sign of holding him in high favour. It was the man’s
      glib tongue, chiefly, that had gained him his master’s confidence.
      He told on all the servants, and Sharov valued him for it.
    

      Gerasim approached and greeted him. The coachman gave his guest a proper
      reception, served him with tea and something to eat, and asked him how he
      was doing.
    

      “Very badly, Yegor Danilych,” said Gerasim. “I’ve
      been without a job for weeks.”
    

      “Didn’t you ask your old employer to take you back?”
    

      “I did.”
    

      “He wouldn’t take you again?”
    

      “The position was filled already.”
    

      “That’s it. That’s the way you young fellows are. You
      serve your employers so-so, and when you leave your jobs, you usually have
      muddied up the way back to them. You ought to serve your masters so that
      they will think a lot of you, and when you come again, they will not
      refuse you, but rather dismiss the man who has taken your place.”
    

      “How can a man do that? In these days there aren’t any
      employers like that, and we aren’t exactly angels, either.”
    

      “What’s the use of wasting words? I just want to tell you
      about myself. If for some reason or other I should ever have to leave this
      place and go home, not only would Mr. Sharov, if I came back, take me on
      again without a word, but he would be glad to, too.”
    

      Gerasim sat there downcast. He saw his friend was boasting, and it
      occurred to him to gratify him.
    

      “I know it,” he said. “But it’s hard to find men
      like you, Yegor Danilych. If you were a poor worker, your master would not
      have kept you twelve years.”
    

      Yegor smiled. He liked the praise.
    

      “That’s it,” he said. “If you were to live and
      serve as I do, you wouldn’t be out of work for months and months.”
    

      Gerasim made no reply.
    

      Yegor was summoned to his master.
    

      “Wait a moment,” he said to Gerasim. “I’ll be
      right back.”
    

      “Very well.”
    

      III
    

Yegor came back and
      reported that inside of half an hour he would have to have the horses
      harnessed, ready to drive his master to town. He lighted his pipe and took
      several turns in the room. Then he came to a halt in front of Gerasim.
    

      “Listen, my boy,” he said, “if you want, I’ll ask
      my master to take you as a servant here.”
    

      “Does he need a man?”
    

      “We have one, but he’s not much good. He’s getting old,
      and it’s very hard for him to do the work. It’s lucky for us
      that the neighbourhood isn’t a lively one and the police don’t
      make a fuss about things being kept just so, else the old man couldn’t
      manage to keep the place clean enough for them.”
    

      “Oh, if you can, then please do say a word for me, Yegor Danilych. I’ll
      pray for you all my life. I can’t stand being without work any
      longer.”
    

      “All right, I’ll speak for you. Come again to-morrow, and in
      the meantime take this ten-kopek piece. It may come in handy.”
    

      “Thanks, Yegor Danilych. Then you will try for me? Please do
      me the favour.”
    

      “All right. I’ll try for you.”
    

      Gerasim left, and Yegor harnessed up his horses. Then he put on his
      coachman’s habit, and drove up to the front door. Mr. Sharov stepped
      out of the house, seated himself in the sleigh, and the horses galloped
      off. He attended to his business in town and returned home. Yegor,
      observing that his master was in a good humour, said to him:
    

      “Yegor Fiodorych, I have a favour to ask of you.”
    

      “What is it?”
    

      “There’s a young man from my village here, a good boy. He’s
      without a job.”
    

      “Well?”
    

      “Wouldn’t you take him?”
    

      “What do I want him for?”
    

      “Use him as man of all work round the place.”
    

      “How about Polikarpych?”
    

      “What good is he? It’s about time you dismissed him.”
    

      “That wouldn’t be fair. He has been with me so many years. I
      can’t let him go just so, without any cause.”
    

      “Supposing he has worked for you for years. He didn’t
      work for nothing. He got paid for it. He’s certainly saved up a few
      dollars for his old age.”
    

      “Saved up! How could he? From what? He’s not alone in the
      world. He has a wife to support, and she has to eat and drink also.”
    

      “His wife earns money, too, at day’s work as charwoman.”
    

      “A lot she could have made! Enough for kvas.”
    

      “Why should you care about Polikarpych and his wife? To tell you the
      truth, he’s a very poor servant. Why should you throw your money
      away on him? He never shovels the snow away on time, or does anything
      right. And when it comes his turn to be night watchman, he slips away at
      least ten times a night. It’s too cold for him. You’ll see,
      some day, because of him, you will have trouble with the police. The
      quarterly inspector will descend on us, and it won’t be so agreeable
      for you to be responsible for Polikarpych.”
    

      “Still, it’s pretty rough. He’s been with me fifteen
      years. And to treat him that way in his old age—it would be a sin.”
    

      “A sin! Why, what harm would you be doing him? He won’t
      starve. He’ll go to the almshouse. It will be better for him, too,
      to be quiet in his old age.”
    

      Sharov reflected.
    

      “All right,” he said finally. “Bring your friend here. I’ll
      see what I can do.”
    

      “Do take him, sir. I’m so sorry for him. He’s a good
      boy, and he’s been without work for such a long time. I know he’ll
      do his work well and serve you faithfully. On account of having to report
      for military duty, he lost his last position. If it hadn’t been for
      that, his master would never have let him go.”
    











      IV
    

      The next evening Gerasim came again and asked:
    

      “Well, could you do anything for me?”
    

      “Something, I believe. First let’s have some tea. Then we’ll
      go see my master.”
    

      Even tea had no allurements for Gerasim. He was eager for a decision; but
      under the compulsion of politeness to his host, he gulped down two glasses
      of tea, and then they betook themselves to Sharov.
    

      Sharov asked Gerasim where he had lived before and what work he could do.
      Then he told him he was prepared to engage him as man of all work, and he
      should come back the next day ready to take the place.
    

      Gerasim was fairly stunned by the great stroke of fortune. So overwhelming
      was his joy that his legs would scarcely carry him. He went to the
      coachman’s room, and Yegor said to him:
    

      “Well, my lad, see to it that you do your work right, so that I shan’t
      have to be ashamed of you. You know what masters are like. If you go wrong
      once, they’ll be at you forever after with their fault-finding, and
      never give you peace.”
    

      “Don’t worry about that, Yegor Danilych.”
    

      “Well—well.”
    

      Gerasim took leave, crossing the yard to go out by the gate. Polikarpych’s
      rooms gave on the yard, and a broad beam of light from the window fell
      across Gerasim’s way. He was curious to get a glimpse of his future
      home, but the panes were all frosted over, and it was impossible to peep
      through. However, he could hear what the people inside were saying.
    

      “What will we do now?” was said in a woman’s voice.
    

      “I don’t know, I don’t know,” a man, undoubtedly
      Polikarpych, replied. “Go begging, I suppose.”
    

      “That’s all we can do. There’s nothing else left,”
      said the woman. “Oh, we poor people, what a miserable life we lead.
      We work and work from early morning till late at night, day after day, and
      when we get old, then it’s, ‘Away with you!’”
    

      “What can we do? Our master is not one of us. It wouldn’t be
      worth the while to say much to him about it. He cares only for his own
      advantage.”
    

      “All the masters are so mean. They don’t think of any one but
      themselves. It doesn’t occur to them that we work for them honestly
      and faithfully for years, and use up our best strength in their service.
      They’re afraid to keep us a year longer, even though we’ve got
      all the strength we need to do their work. If we weren’t strong
      enough, we’d go of our own accord.”
    

      “The master’s not so much to blame as his coachman. Yegor
      Danilych wants to get a good position for his friend.”
    

      “Yes, he’s a serpent. He knows how to wag his tongue. You
      wait, you foul-mouthed beast, I’ll get even with you. I’ll go
      straight to the master and tell him how the fellow deceives him, how he
      steals the hay and fodder. I’ll put it down in writing, and he can
      convince himself how the fellow lies about us all.”
    

      “Don’t, old woman. Don’t sin.”
    

      “Sin? Isn’t what I said all true? I know to a dot what I’m
      saying, and I mean to tell it straight out to the master. He should see
      with his own eyes. Why not? What can we do now anyhow? Where shall we go?
      He’s ruined us, ruined us.”
    

      The old woman burst out sobbing.
    

      Gerasim heard all that, and it stabbed him like a dagger. He realised what
      misfortune he would be bringing the old people, and it made him sick at
      heart. He stood there a long while, saddened, lost in thought, then he
      turned and went back into the coachman’s room.
    

      “Ah, you forgot something?”
    

      “No, Yegor Danilych.” Gerasim stammered out, “I’ve
      come—listen—I want to thank you ever and ever so much—for
      the way you received me—and—and all the trouble you took for
      me—but—I can’t take the place.”
    

      “What! What does that mean?”
    

      “Nothing. I don’t want the place. I will look for another one
      for myself.”
    

      Yegor flew into a rage.
    

      “Did you mean to make a fool of me, did you, you idiot? You come
      here so meek—‘Try for me, do try for me’—and then
      you refuse to take the place. You rascal, you have disgraced me!”
    

      Gerasim found nothing to say in reply. He reddened, and lowered his eyes.
      Yegor turned his back scornfully and said nothing more.
    

      Then Gerasim quietly picked up his cap and left the coachman’s room.
      He crossed the yard rapidly, went out by the gate, and hurried off down
      the street. He felt happy and lighthearted.
    











      ONE AUTUMN NIGHT
    

      BY MAXIM GORKY
    

Once in the autumn
      I happened to be in a very unpleasant and inconvenient position. In the
      town where I had just arrived and where I knew not a soul, I found myself
      without a farthing in my pocket and without a night’s lodging.
    

      Having sold during the first few days every part of my costume without
      which it was still possible to go about, I passed from the town into the
      quarter called “Yste,” where were the steamship wharves—a
      quarter which during the navigation season fermented with boisterous,
      laborious life, but now was silent and deserted, for we were in the last
      days of October.
    

      Dragging my feet along the moist sand, and obstinately scrutinising it
      with the desire to discover in it any sort of fragment of food, I wandered
      alone among the deserted buildings and warehouses, and thought how good it
      would be to get a full meal.
    

      In our present state of culture hunger of the mind is more quickly
      satisfied than hunger of the body. You wander about the streets, you are
      surrounded by buildings not bad-looking from the outside and—you may
      safely say it—not so badly furnished inside, and the sight of them
      may excite within you stimulating ideas about architecture, hygiene, and
      many other wise and high-flying subjects. You may meet warmly and neatly
      dressed folks—all very polite, and turning away from you tactfully,
      not wishing offensively to notice the lamentable fact of your existence.
      Well, well, the mind of a hungry man is always better nourished and
      healthier than the mind of the well-fed man; and there you have a
      situation from which you may draw a very ingenious conclusion in favour of
      the ill fed.
    

      The evening was approaching, the rain was falling, and the wind blew
      violently from the north. It whistled in the empty booths and shops, blew
      into the plastered window-panes of the taverns, and whipped into foam the
      wavelets of the river which splashed noisily on the sandy shore, casting
      high their white crests, racing one after another into the dim distance,
      and leaping impetuously over one another’s shoulders. It seemed as
      if the river felt the proximity of winter, and was running at random away
      from the fetters of ice which the north wind might well have flung upon
      her that very night. The sky was heavy and dark; down from it swept
      incessantly scarcely visible drops of rain, and the melancholy elegy in
      nature all around me was emphasised by a couple of battered and misshapen
      willow-trees and a boat, bottom upwards, that was fastened to their roots.
    

      The overturned canoe with its battered keel and the miserable old trees
      rifled by the cold wind—everything around me was bankrupt, barren,
      and dead, and the sky flowed with undryable tears... Everything around was
      waste and gloomy ... it seemed as if everything were dead, leaving me
      alone among the living, and for me also a cold death waited.
    

      I was then eighteen years old—a good time!
    

      I walked and walked along the cold wet sand, making my chattering teeth
      warble in honour of cold and hunger, when suddenly, as I was carefully
      searching for something to eat behind one of the empty crates, I perceived
      behind it, crouching on the ground, a figure in woman’s clothes dank
      with the rain and clinging fast to her stooping shoulders. Standing over
      her, I watched to see what she was doing. It appeared that she was digging
      a trench in the sand with her hands—digging away under one of the
      crates.
    

      “Why are you doing that?” I asked, crouching down on my heels
      quite close to her.
    

      She gave a little scream and was quickly on her legs again. Now that she
      stood there staring at me, with her wide-open grey eyes full of terror, I
      perceived that it was a girl of my own age, with a very pleasant face
      embellished unfortunately by three large blue marks. This spoilt her,
      although these blue marks had been distributed with a remarkable sense of
      proportion, one at a time, and all were of equal size—two under the
      eyes, and one a little bigger on the forehead just over the bridge of the
      nose. This symmetry was evidently the work of an artist well inured to the
      business of spoiling the human physiognomy.
    

      The girl looked at me, and the terror in her eyes gradually died out...
      She shook the sand from her hands, adjusted her cotton head-gear, cowered
      down, and said:
    

      “I suppose you too want something to eat? Dig away then! My hands
      are tired. Over there”—she nodded her head in the direction of
      a booth—“there is bread for certain ... and sausages too...
      That booth is still carrying on business.”
    

      I began to dig. She, after waiting a little and looking at me, sat down
      beside me and began to help me.
    

      We worked in silence. I cannot say now whether I thought at that moment of
      the criminal code, of morality, of proprietorship, and all the other
      things about which, in the opinion of many experienced persons, one ought
      to think every moment of one’s life. Wishing to keep as close to the
      truth as possible, I must confess that apparently I was so deeply engaged
      in digging under the crate that I completely forgot about everything else
      except this one thing: What could be inside that crate?
    

      The evening drew on. The grey, mouldy, cold fog grew thicker and thicker
      around us. The waves roared with a hollower sound than before, and the
      rain pattered down on the boards of that crate more loudly and more
      frequently. Somewhere or other the night-watchman began springing his
      rattle.
    

      “Has it got a bottom or not?” softly inquired my assistant. I
      did not understand what she was talking about, and I kept silence.
    

      “I say, has the crate got a bottom? If it has we shall try in vain
      to break into it. Here we are digging a trench, and we may, after all,
      come upon nothing but solid boards. How shall we take them off? Better
      smash the lock; it is a wretched lock.”
    

      Good ideas rarely visit the heads of women, but, as you see, they do visit
      them sometimes. I have always valued good ideas, and have always tried to
      utilise them as far as possible.
    

      Having found the lock, I tugged at it and wrenched off the whole thing. My
      accomplice immediately stooped down and wriggled like a serpent into the
      gaping-open, four cornered cover of the crate whence she called to me
      approvingly, in a low tone:
    

      “You’re a brick!”
    

      Nowadays a little crumb of praise from a woman is dearer to me than a
      whole dithyramb from a man, even though he be more eloquent than all the
      ancient and modern orators put together. Then, however, I was less amiably
      disposed than I am now, and, paying no attention to the compliment of my
      comrade, I asked her curtly and anxiously:
    

      “Is there anything?”
    

      In a monotonous tone she set about calculating our discoveries.
    

      “A basketful of bottles—thick furs—a sunshade—an
      iron pail.”
    

      All this was uneatable. I felt that my hopes had vanished... But suddenly
      she exclaimed vivaciously:
    

      “Aha! here it is!”
    

      “What?”
    

      “Bread ... a loaf ... it’s only wet ... take it!”
    

      A loaf flew to my feet and after it herself, my valiant comrade. I had
      already bitten off a morsel, stuffed it in my mouth, and was chewing it...
    

      “Come, give me some too!... And we mustn’t stay here... Where
      shall we go?” she looked inquiringly about on all sides... It was
      dark, wet, and boisterous.
    

      “Look! there’s an upset canoe yonder ... let us go there.”
    

      “Let us go then!” And off we set, demolishing our booty as we
      went, and filling our mouths with large portions of it... The rain grew
      more violent, the river roared; from somewhere or other resounded a
      prolonged mocking whistle—just as if Someone great who feared nobody
      was whistling down all earthly institutions and along with them this
      horrid autumnal wind and us its heroes. This whistling made my heart throb
      painfully, in spite of which I greedily went on eating, and in this
      respect the girl, walking on my left hand, kept even pace with me.
    

      “What do they call you?” I asked her—why I know not.
    

      “Natasha,” she answered shortly, munching loudly.
    

      I stared at her. My heart ached within me; and then I stared into the mist
      before me, and it seemed to me as if the inimical countenance of my
      Destiny was smiling at me enigmatically and coldly.
    








      The rain scourged the timbers of the skiff incessantly, and its soft
      patter induced melancholy thoughts, and the wind whistled as it flew down
      into the boat’s battered bottom through a rift, where some loose
      splinters of wood were rattling together—a disquieting and
      depressing sound. The waves of the river were splashing on the shore, and
      sounded so monotonous and hopeless, just as if they were telling something
      unbearably dull and heavy, which was boring them into utter disgust,
      something from which they wanted to run away and yet were obliged to talk
      about all the same. The sound of the rain blended with their splashing,
      and a long-drawn sigh seemed to be floating above the overturned skiff—the
      endless, labouring sigh of the earth, injured and exhausted by the eternal
      changes from the bright and warm summer to the cold misty and damp autumn.
      The wind blew continually over the desolate shore and the foaming river—blew
      and sang its melancholy songs...
    

      Our position beneath the shelter of the skiff was utterly devoid of
      comfort; it was narrow and damp, tiny cold drops of rain dribbled through
      the damaged bottom; gusts of wind penetrated it. We sat in silence and
      shivered with cold. I remembered that I wanted to go to sleep. Natasha
      leaned her back against the hull of the boat and curled herself up into a
      tiny ball. Embracing her knees with her hands, and resting her chin upon
      them, she stared doggedly at the river with wide-open eyes; on the pale
      patch of her face they seemed immense, because of the blue marks below
      them. She never moved, and this immobility and silence—I felt it—gradually
      produced within me a terror of my neighbour. I wanted to talk to her, but
      I knew not how to begin.
    

      It was she herself who spoke.
    

      “What a cursed thing life is!” she exclaimed plainly,
      abstractedly, and in a tone of deep conviction.
    

      But this was no complaint. In these words there was too much of
      indifference for a complaint. This simple soul thought according to her
      understanding—thought and proceeded to form a certain conclusion
      which she expressed aloud, and which I could not confute for fear of
      contradicting myself. Therefore I was silent, and she, as if she had not
      noticed me, continued to sit there immovable.
    

      “Even if we croaked ... what then...?” Natasha began again,
      this time quietly and reflectively, and still there was not one note of
      complaint in her words. It was plain that this person, in the course of
      her reflections on life, was regarding her own case, and had arrived at
      the conviction that in order to preserve herself from the mockeries of
      life, she was not in a position to do anything else but simply “croak”—to
      use her own expression.
    

      The clearness of this line of thought was inexpressibly sad and painful to
      me, and I felt that if I kept silence any longer I was really bound to
      weep... And it would have been shameful to have done this before a woman,
      especially as she was not weeping herself. I resolved to speak to her.
    

      “Who was it that knocked you about?” I asked. For the moment I
      could not think of anything more sensible or more delicate.
    

      “Pashka did it all,” she answered in a dull and level tone.
    

      “And who is he?”
    

      “My lover... He was a baker.”
    

      “Did he beat you often?”
    

      “Whenever he was drunk he beat me... Often!”
    

      And suddenly, turning towards me, she began to talk about herself, Pashka,
      and their mutual relations. He was a baker with red moustaches and played
      very well on the banjo. He came to see her and greatly pleased her, for he
      was a merry chap and wore nice clean clothes. He had a vest which cost
      fifteen rubles and boots with dress tops. For these reasons she had fallen
      in love with him, and he became her “creditor.” And when he
      became her creditor he made it his business to take away from her the
      money which her other friends gave to her for bonbons, and, getting drunk
      on this money, he would fall to beating her; but that would have been
      nothing if he hadn’t also begun to “run after” other
      girls before her very eyes.
    

      “Now, wasn’t that an insult? I am not worse than the others.
      Of course that meant that he was laughing at me, the blackguard. The day
      before yesterday I asked leave of my mistress to go out for a bit, went to
      him, and there I found Dimka sitting beside him drunk. And he, too, was
      half seas over. I said, ‘You scoundrel, you!’ And he gave me a
      thorough hiding. He kicked me and dragged me by the hair. But that was
      nothing to what came after. He spoiled everything I had on—left me
      just as I am now! How could I appear before my mistress? He spoiled
      everything ... my dress and my jacket too—it was quite a new one; I
      gave a fiver for it ... and tore my kerchief from my head... Oh, Lord!
      What will become of me now?” she suddenly whined in a lamentable
      overstrained voice.
    

      The wind howled, and became ever colder and more boisterous... Again my
      teeth began to dance up and down, and she, huddled up to avoid the cold,
      pressed as closely to me as she could, so that I could see the gleam of
      her eyes through the darkness.
    

      “What wretches all you men are! I’d burn you all in an oven; I’d
      cut you in pieces. If any one of you was dying I’d spit in his
      mouth, and not pity him a bit. Mean skunks! You wheedle and wheedle, you
      wag your tails like cringing dogs, and we fools give ourselves up to you,
      and it’s all up with us! Immediately you trample us underfoot...
      Miserable loafers”
    

      She cursed us up and down, but there was no vigour, no malice, no hatred
      of these “miserable loafers” in her cursing that I could hear.
      The tone of her language by no means corresponded with its subject-matter,
      for it was calm enough, and the gamut of her voice was terribly poor.
    

      Yet all this made a stronger impression on me than the most eloquent and
      convincing pessimistic books and speeches, of which I had read a good many
      and which I still read to this day. And this, you see, was because the
      agony of a dying person is much more natural and violent than the most
      minute and picturesque descriptions of death.
    

      I felt really wretched—more from cold than from the words of my
      neighbour. I groaned softly and ground my teeth.
    

      Almost at the same moment I felt two little arms about me—one of
      them touched my neck and the other lay upon my face—and at the same
      time an anxious, gentle, friendly voice uttered the question:
    

      “What ails you?”
    

      I was ready to believe that some one else was asking me this and not
      Natasha, who had just declared that all men were scoundrels, and expressed
      a wish for their destruction. But she it was, and now she began speaking
      quickly, hurriedly.
    

      “What ails you, eh? Are you cold? Are you frozen? Ah, what a one you
      are, sitting there so silent like a little owl! Why, you should have told
      me long ago that you were cold. Come ... lie on the ground ... stretch
      yourself out and I will lie ... there! How’s that? Now put your arms
      round me?... tighter! How’s that? You shall be warm very soon now...
      And then we’ll lie back to back... The night will pass so quickly,
      see if it won’t. I say ... have you too been drinking?... Turned out
      of your place, eh?... It doesn’t matter.”
    

      And she comforted me... She encouraged me.
    

      May I be thrice accursed! What a world of irony was in this single fact
      for me! Just imagine! Here was I, seriously occupied at this very time
      with the destiny of humanity, thinking of the re-organisation of the
      social system, of political revolutions, reading all sorts of
      devilishly-wise books whose abysmal profundity was certainly unfathomable
      by their very authors—at this very time, I say, I was trying with
      all my might to make of myself “a potent active social force.”
      It even seemed to me that I had partially accomplished my object; anyhow,
      at this time, in my ideas about myself, I had got so far as to recognise
      that I had an exclusive right to exist, that I had the necessary greatness
      to deserve to live my life, and that I was fully competent to play a great
      historical part therein. And a woman was now warming me with her body, a
      wretched, battered, hunted creature, who had no place and no value in
      life, and whom I had never thought of helping till she helped me herself,
      and whom I really would not have known how to help in any way even if the
      thought of it had occurred to me.
    

      Ah! I was ready to think that all this was happening to me in a dream—in
      a disagreeable, an oppressive dream.
    

      But, ugh! it was impossible for me to think that, for cold drops of rain
      were dripping down upon me, the woman was pressing close to me, her warm
      breath was fanning my face, and—despite a slight odor of vodka—it
      did me good. The wind howled and raged, the rain smote upon the skiff, the
      waves splashed, and both of us, embracing each other convulsively,
      nevertheless shivered with cold. All this was only too real, and I am
      certain that nobody ever dreamed such an oppressive and horrid dream as
      that reality.
    

      But Natasha was talking all the time of something or other, talking kindly
      and sympathetically, as only women can talk. Beneath the influence of her
      voice and kindly words a little fire began to burn up within me, and
      something inside my heart thawed in consequence.
    

      Then tears poured from my eyes like a hailstorm, washing away from my
      heart much that was evil, much that was stupid, much sorrow and dirt which
      had fastened upon it before that night. Natasha comforted me.
    

      “Come, come, that will do, little one! Don’t take on! That’ll
      do! God will give you another chance ... you will right yourself and stand
      in your proper place again ... and it will be all right...”
    

      And she kept kissing me ... many kisses did she give me ... burning kisses
      ... and all for nothing...
    

      Those were the first kisses from a woman that had ever been bestowed upon
      me, and they were the best kisses too, for all the subsequent kisses cost
      me frightfully dear, and really gave me nothing at all in exchange.
    

      “Come, don’t take on so, funny one! I’ll manage for you
      to-morrow if you cannot find a place.” Her quiet persuasive
      whispering sounded in my ears as if it came through a dream...
    

      There we lay till dawn...
    

      And when the dawn came, we crept from behind the skiff and went into the
      town... Then we took friendly leave of each other and never met again,
      although for half a year I searched in every hole and corner for that kind
      Natasha, with whom I spent the autumn night just described.
    

      If she be already dead—and well for her if it were so—may she
      rest in peace! And if she be alive ... still I say “Peace to her
      soul!” And may the consciousness of her fall never enter her soul
      ... for that would be a superfluous and fruitless suffering if life is to
      be lived...
    











      HER LOVER
    

      BY MAXIM GORKY
    

An acquaintance of
      mine once told me the following story.
    

      When I was a student at Moscow I happened to live alongside one of those
      ladies whose repute is questionable. She was a Pole, and they called her
      Teresa. She was a tallish, powerfully-built brunette, with black, bushy
      eyebrows and a large coarse face as if carved out by a hatchet—the
      bestial gleam of her dark eyes, her thick bass voice, her cabman-like gait
      and her immense muscular vigour, worthy of a fishwife, inspired me with
      horror. I lived on the top flight and her garret was opposite to mine. I
      never left my door open when I knew her to be at home. But this, after
      all, was a very rare occurrence. Sometimes I chanced to meet her on the
      staircase or in the yard, and she would smile upon me with a smile which
      seemed to me to be sly and cynical. Occasionally, I saw her drunk, with
      bleary eyes, tousled hair, and a particularly hideous grin. On such
      occasions she would speak to me.
    

      “How d’ye do, Mr. Student!” and her stupid laugh would
      still further intensify my loathing of her. I should have liked to have
      changed my quarters in order to have avoided such encounters and
      greetings; but my little chamber was a nice one, and there was such a wide
      view from the window, and it was always so quiet in the street below—so
      I endured.
    

      And one morning I was sprawling on my couch, trying to find some sort of
      excuse for not attending my class, when the door opened, and the bass
      voice of Teresa the loathsome resounded from my threshold:
    

      “Good health to you, Mr. Student!”
    

      “What do you want?” I said. I saw that her face was confused
      and supplicatory... It was a very unusual sort of face for her.
    

      “Sir! I want to beg a favour of you. Will you grant it me?”
    

      I lay there silent, and thought to myself:
    

      “Gracious!... Courage, my boy!”
    

      “I want to send a letter home, that’s what it is,” she
      said; her voice was beseeching, soft, timid.
    

      “Deuce take you!” I thought; but up I jumped, sat down at my
      table, took a sheet of paper, and said:
    

      “Come here, sit down, and dictate!”
    

      She came, sat down very gingerly on a chair, and looked at me with a
      guilty look.
    

      “Well, to whom do you want to write?”
    

      “To Boleslav Kashput, at the town of Svieptziana, on the Warsaw
      Road...”
    

      “Well, fire away!”
    

      “My dear Boles ... my darling ... my faithful lover. May the Mother
      of God protect thee! Thou heart of gold, why hast thou not written for
      such a long time to thy sorrowing little dove, Teresa?”
    

      I very nearly burst out laughing. “A sorrowing little dove!”
      more than five feet high, with fists a stone and more in weight, and as
      black a face as if the little dove had lived all its life in a chimney,
      and had never once washed itself! Restraining myself somehow, I asked:
    

      “Who is this Bolest?”
    

      “Boles, Mr. Student,” she said, as if offended with me for
      blundering over the name, “he is Boles—my young man.”
    

      “Young man!”
    

      “Why are you so surprised, sir? Cannot I, a girl, have a young man?”
    

      She? A girl? Well!
    

      “Oh, why not?” I said. “All things are possible. And has
      he been your young man long?”
    

      “Six years.”
    

      “Oh, ho!” I thought. “Well, let us write your letter...”
    

      And I tell you plainly that I would willingly have changed places with
      this Boles if his fair correspondent had been not Teresa but something
      less than she.
    

      “I thank you most heartily, sir, for your kind services,” said
      Teresa to me, with a curtsey. “Perhaps I can show you
      some service, eh?”
    

      “No, I most humbly thank you all the same.”
    

      “Perhaps, sir, your shirts or your trousers may want a little
      mending?”
    

      I felt that this mastodon in petticoats had made me grow quite red with
      shame, and I told her pretty sharply that I had no need whatever of her
      services.
    

      She departed.
    

      A week or two passed away. It was evening. I was sitting at my window
      whistling and thinking of some expedient for enabling me to get away from
      myself. I was bored; the weather was dirty. I didn’t want to go out,
      and out of sheer ennui I began a course of self-analysis and reflection.
      This also was dull enough work, but I didn’t care about doing
      anything else. Then the door opened. Heaven be praised! Some one came in.
    

      “Oh, Mr. Student, you have no pressing business, I hope?”
    

      It was Teresa. Humph!
    

      “No. What is it?”
    

      “I was going to ask you, sir, to write me another letter.”
    

      “Very well! To Boles, eh?”
    

      “No, this time it is from him.”
    

      “Wha-at?”
    

      “Stupid that I am! It is not for me, Mr. Student, I beg your pardon.
      It is for a friend of mine, that is to say, not a friend but an
      acquaintance—a man acquaintance. He has a sweetheart just like me
      here, Teresa. That’s how it is. Will you, sir, write a letter to
      this Teresa?”
    

      I looked at her—her face was troubled, her fingers were trembling. I
      was a bit fogged at first—and then I guessed how it was.
    

      “Look here, my lady,” I said, “there are no Boleses or
      Teresas at all, and you’ve been telling me a pack of lies. Don’t
      you come sneaking about me any longer. I have no wish whatever to
      cultivate your acquaintance. Do you understand?”
    

      And suddenly she grew strangely terrified and distraught; she began to
      shift from foot to foot without moving from the place, and spluttered
      comically, as if she wanted to say something and couldn’t. I waited
      to see what would come of all this, and I saw and felt that, apparently, I
      had made a great mistake in suspecting her of wishing to draw me from the
      path of righteousness. It was evidently something very different.
    

      “Mr. Student!” she began, and suddenly, waving her hand, she
      turned abruptly towards the door and went out. I remained with a very
      unpleasant feeling in my mind. I listened. Her door was flung violently to—plainly
      the poor wench was very angry... I thought it over, and resolved to go to
      her, and, inviting her to come in here, write everything she wanted.
    

      I entered her apartment. I looked round. She was sitting at the table,
      leaning on her elbows, with her head in her hands.
    

      “Listen to me,” I said.
    

      Now, whenever I come to this point in my story, I always feel horribly
      awkward and idiotic. Well, well!
    

      “Listen to me,” I said.
    

      She leaped from her seat, came towards me with flashing eyes, and laying
      her hands on my shoulders, began to whisper, or rather to hum in her
      peculiar bass voice:
    

      “Look you, now! It’s like this. There’s no Boles at all,
      and there’s no Teresa either. But what’s that to you? Is it a
      hard thing for you to draw your pen over paper? Eh? Ah, and you,
      too! Still such a little fair-haired boy! There’s nobody at all,
      neither Boles, nor Teresa, only me. There you have it, and much good may
      it do you!”
    

      “Pardon me!” said I, altogether flabbergasted by such a
      reception, “what is it all about? There’s no Boles, you say?”
    

      “No. So it is.”
    

      “And no Teresa either?”
    

      “And no Teresa. I’m Teresa.”
    

      I didn’t understand it at all. I fixed my eyes upon her, and tried
      to make out which of us was taking leave of his or her senses. But she
      went again to the table, searched about for something, came back to me,
      and said in an offended tone:
    

      “If it was so hard for you to write to Boles, look, there’s
      your letter, take it! Others will write for me.”
    

      I looked. In her hand was my letter to Boles. Phew!
    

      “Listen, Teresa! What is the meaning of all this? Why must you get
      others to write for you when I have already written it, and you haven’t
      sent it?”
    

      “Sent it where?”
    

      “Why, to this—Boles.”
    

      “There’s no such person.”
    

      I absolutely did not understand it. There was nothing for me but to spit
      and go. Then she explained.
    

      “What is it?” she said, still offended. “There’s
      no such person, I tell you,” and she extended her arms as if she
      herself did not understand why there should be no such person. “But
      I wanted him to be... Am I then not a human creature like the rest of
      them? Yes, yes, I know, I know, of course... Yet no harm was done to any
      one by my writing to him that I can see...”
    

      “Pardon me—to whom?”
    

      “To Boles, of course.”
    

      “But he doesn’t exist.”
    

      “Alas! alas! But what if he doesn’t? He doesn’t exist,
      but he might! I write to him, and it looks as if he did exist. And
      Teresa—that’s me, and he replies to me, and then I write to
      him again...”
    

      I understood at last. And I felt so sick, so miserable, so ashamed,
      somehow. Alongside of me, not three yards away, lived a human creature who
      had nobody in the world to treat her kindly, affectionately, and this
      human being had invented a friend for herself!
    

      “Look, now! you wrote me a letter to Boles, and I gave it to some
      one else to read it to me; and when they read it to me I listened and
      fancied that Boles was there. And I asked you to write me a letter from
      Boles to Teresa—that is to me. When they write such a letter for me,
      and read it to me, I feel quite sure that Boles is there. And life grows
      easier for me in consequence.”
    

      “Deuce take you for a blockhead!” said I to myself when I
      heard this.
    

      And from thenceforth, regularly, twice a week, I wrote a letter to Boles,
      and an answer from Boles to Teresa. I wrote those answers well... She, of
      course, listened to them, and wept like anything, roared, I should say,
      with her bass voice. And in return for my thus moving her to tears by real
      letters from the imaginary Boles, she began to mend the holes I had in my
      socks, shirts, and other articles of clothing. Subsequently, about three
      months after this history began, they put her in prison for something or
      other. No doubt by this time she is dead.
    

      My acquaintance shook the ash from his cigarette, looked pensively up at
      the sky, and thus concluded:
    

      Well, well, the more a human creature has tasted of bitter things the more
      it hungers after the sweet things of life. And we, wrapped round in the
      rags of our virtues, and regarding others through the mist of our
      self-sufficiency, and persuaded of our universal impeccability, do not
      understand this.
    

      And the whole thing turns out pretty stupidly—and very cruelly. The
      fallen classes, we say. And who are the fallen classes, I should like to
      know? They are, first of all, people with the same bones, flesh, and blood
      and nerves as ourselves. We have been told this day after day for ages.
      And we actually listen—and the devil only knows how hideous the
      whole thing is. Or are we completely depraved by the loud sermonising of
      humanism? In reality, we also are fallen folks, and, so far as I can see,
      very deeply fallen into the abyss of self-sufficiency and the conviction
      of our own superiority. But enough of this. It is all as old as the hills—so
      old that it is a shame to speak of it. Very old indeed—yes, that’s
      what it is!
    











      LAZARUS
    

      BY LEONID ANDREYEV
    

      I
    

When Lazarus rose
      from the grave, after three days and nights in the mysterious thraldom of
      death, and returned alive to his home, it was a long time before any one
      noticed the evil peculiarities in him that were later to make his very
      name terrible. His friends and relatives were jubilant that he had come
      back to life. They surrounded him with tenderness, they were lavish of
      their eager attentions, spending the greatest care upon his food and drink
      and the new garments they made for him. They clad him gorgeously in the
      glowing colours of hope and laughter, and when, arrayed like a bridegroom,
      he sat at table with them again, ate again, and drank again, they wept
      fondly and summoned the neighbours to look upon the man miraculously
      raised from the dead.
    

      The neighbours came and were moved with joy. Strangers arrived from
      distant cities and villages to worship the miracle. They burst into stormy
      exclamations, and buzzed around the house of Mary and Martha, like so many
      bees.
    

      That which was new in Lazarus’ face and gestures they explained
      naturally, as the traces of his severe illness and the shock he had passed
      through. It was evident that the disintegration of the body had been
      halted by a miraculous power, but that the restoration had not been
      complete; that death had left upon his face and body the effect of an
      artist’s unfinished sketch seen through a thin glass. On his
      temples, under his eyes, and in the hollow of his cheek lay a thick,
      earthy blue. His fingers were blue, too, and under his nails, which had
      grown long in the grave, the blue had turned livid. Here and there on his
      lips and body, the skin, blistered in the grave, had burst open and left
      reddish glistening cracks, as if covered with a thin, glassy slime. And he
      had grown exceedingly stout. His body was horribly bloated and suggested
      the fetid, damp smell of putrefaction. But the cadaverous, heavy odour
      that clung to his burial garments and, as it seemed, to his very body,
      soon wore off, and after some time the blue of his hands and face
      softened, and the reddish cracks of his skin smoothed out, though they
      never disappeared completely. Such was the aspect of Lazarus in his second
      life. It looked natural only to those who had seen him buried.
    

      Not merely Lazarus’ face, but his very character, it seemed, had
      changed; though it astonished no one and did not attract the attention it
      deserved. Before his death Lazarus had been cheerful and careless, a lover
      of laughter and harmless jest. It was because of his good humour, pleasant
      and equable, his freedom from meanness and gloom, that he had been so
      beloved by the Master. Now he was grave and silent; neither he himself
      jested nor did he laugh at the jests of others; and the words he spoke
      occasionally were simple, ordinary and necessary words—words as much
      devoid of sense and depth as are the sounds with which an animal expresses
      pain and pleasure, thirst and hunger. Such words a man may speak all his
      life and no one would ever know the sorrows and joys that dwelt within
      him.
    

      Thus it was that Lazarus sat at the festive table among his friends and
      relatives—his face the face of a corpse over which, for three days,
      death had reigned in darkness, his garments gorgeous and festive,
      glittering with gold, bloody-red and purple; his mien heavy and silent. He
      was horribly changed and strange, but as yet undiscovered. In high waves,
      now mild, now stormy, the festivities went on around him. Warm glances of
      love caressed his face, still cold with the touch of the grave; and a
      friend’s warm hand patted his bluish, heavy hand. And the music
      played joyous tunes mingled of the sounds of the tympanum, the pipe, the
      zither and the dulcimer. It was as if bees were humming, locusts buzzing
      and birds singing over the happy home of Mary and Martha.
    

      II
    

Some one recklessly
      lifted the veil. By one breath of an uttered word he destroyed the serene
      charm, and uncovered the truth in its ugly nakedness. No thought was
      clearly defined in his mind, when his lips smilingly asked: “Why do
      you not tell us, Lazarus, what was There?” And all became silent,
      struck with the question. Only now it seemed to have occurred to them that
      for three days Lazarus had been dead; and they looked with curiosity,
      awaiting an answer. But Lazarus remained silent.
    

      “You will not tell us?” wondered the inquirer. “Is it so
      terrible There?”
    

      Again his thought lagged behind his words. Had it preceded them, he would
      not have asked the question, for, at the very moment he uttered it, his
      heart sank with a dread fear. All grew restless; they awaited the words of
      Lazarus anxiously. But he was silent, cold and severe, and his eyes were
      cast down. And now, as if for the first time, they perceived the horrible
      bluishness of his face and the loathsome corpulence of his body. On the
      table, as if forgotten by Lazarus, lay his livid blue hand, and all eyes
      were riveted upon it, as though expecting the desired answer from that
      hand. The musicians still played; then silence fell upon them, too, and
      the gay sounds died down, as scattered coals are extinguished by water.
      The pipe became mute, and the ringing tympanum and the murmuring dulcimer;
      and as though a chord were broken, as though song itself were dying, the
      zither echoed a trembling broken sound. Then all was quiet.
    

      “You will not?” repeated the inquirer, unable to restrain his
      babbling tongue. Silence reigned, and the livid blue hand lay motionless.
      It moved slightly, and the company sighed with relief and raised their
      eyes. Lazarus, risen from the dead, was looking straight at them,
      embracing all with one glance, heavy and terrible.
    

      This was on the third day after Lazarus had arisen from the grave. Since
      then many had felt that his gaze was the gaze of destruction, but neither
      those who had been forever crushed by it, nor those who in the prime of
      life (mysterious even as death) had found the will to resist his glance,
      could ever explain the terror that lay immovable in the depths of his
      black pupils. He looked quiet and simple. One felt that he had no
      intention to hide anything, but also no intention to tell anything. His
      look was cold, as of one who is entirely indifferent to all that is alive.
      And many careless people who pressed around him, and did not notice him,
      later learned with wonder and fear the name of this stout, quiet man who
      brushed against them with his sumptuous, gaudy garments. The sun did not
      stop shining when he looked, neither did the fountain cease playing, and
      the Eastern sky remained cloudless and blue as always; but the man who
      fell under his inscrutable gaze could no longer feel the sun, nor hear the
      fountain, nor recognise his native sky. Sometimes he would cry bitterly,
      sometimes tear his hair in despair and madly call for help; but generally
      it happened that the men thus stricken by the gaze of Lazarus began to
      fade away listlessly and quietly and pass into a slow death lasting many
      long years. They died in the presence of everybody, colourless, haggard
      and gloomy, like trees withering on rocky ground. Those who screamed in
      madness sometimes came back to life; but the others, never.
    

      “So you will not tell us, Lazarus, what you saw There?” the
      inquirer repeated for the third time. But now his voice was dull, and a
      dead, grey weariness looked stupidly from out his eyes. The faces of all
      present were also covered by the same dead grey weariness like a mist. The
      guests stared at one another stupidly, not knowing why they had come
      together or why they sat around this rich table. They stopped talking, and
      vaguely felt it was time to leave; but they could not overcome the
      lassitude that spread through their muscles. So they continued to sit
      there, each one isolated, like little dim lights scattered in the darkness
      of night.
    

      The musicians were paid to play, and they again took up the instruments,
      and again played gay or mournful airs. But it was music made to order,
      always the same tunes, and the guests listened wonderingly. Why was this
      music necessary, they thought, why was it necessary and what good did it
      do for people to pull at strings and blow their cheeks into thin pipes,
      and produce varied and strange-sounding noises?
    

      “How badly they play!” said some one.
    

      The musicians were insulted and left. Then the guests departed one by one,
      for it was nearing night. And when the quiet darkness enveloped them, and
      it became easier to breathe, the image of Lazarus suddenly arose before
      each one in stern splendour. There he stood, with the blue face of a
      corpse and the raiment of a bridegroom, sumptuous and resplendent, in his
      eyes that cold stare in the depths of which lurked The Horrible!
      They stood still as if turned into stone. The darkness surrounded them,
      and in the midst of this darkness flamed up the horrible apparition, the
      supernatural vision, of the one who for three days had lain under the
      measureless power of death. Three days he had been dead. Thrice had the
      sun risen and set—and he had lain dead. The children had played, the
      water had murmured as it streamed over the rocks, the hot dust had clouded
      the highway—and he had been dead. And now he was among men again—touched
      them—looked at them—looked at them! And through the
      black rings of his pupils, as through dark glasses, the unfathomable There
      gazed upon humanity.
    

      III
    

No one took care of
      Lazarus, and no friends or kindred remained with him. Only the great
      desert, enfolding the Holy City, came close to the threshold of his abode.
      It entered his home, and lay down on his couch like a spouse, and put out
      all the fires. No one cared for Lazarus. One after the other went away,
      even his sisters, Mary and Martha. For a long while Martha did not want to
      leave him, for she knew not who would nurse him or take care of him; and
      she cried and prayed. But one night, when the wind was roaming about the
      desert, and the rustling cypress trees were bending over the roof, she
      dressed herself quietly, and quietly went away. Lazarus probably heard how
      the door was slammed—it had not shut properly and the wind kept
      knocking it continually against the post—but he did not rise, did
      not go out, did not try to find out the reason. And the whole night until
      the morning the cypress trees hissed over his head, and the door swung to
      and fro, allowing the cold, greedily prowling desert to enter his
      dwelling. Everybody shunned him as though he were a leper. They wanted to
      put a bell on his neck to avoid meeting him. But some one, turning pale,
      remarked it would be terrible if at night, under the windows, one should
      happen to hear Lazarus’ bell, and all grew pale and assented.
    

      Since he did nothing for himself, he would probably have starved had not
      his neighbours, in trepidation, saved some food for him. Children brought
      it to him. They did not fear him, neither did they laugh at him in the
      innocent cruelty in which children often laugh at unfortunates. They were
      indifferent to him, and Lazarus showed the same indifference to them. He
      showed no desire to thank them for their services; he did not try to pat
      the dark hands and look into the simple shining little eyes. Abandoned to
      the ravages of time and the desert, his house was falling to ruins, and
      his hungry, bleating goats had long been scattered among his neighbours.
      His wedding garments had grown old. He wore them without changing them, as
      he had donned them on that happy day when the musicians played. He did not
      see the difference between old and new, between torn and whole. The
      brilliant colours were burnt and faded; the vicious dogs of the city and
      the sharp thorns of the desert had rent the fine clothes to shreds.
    

      During the day, when the sun beat down mercilessly upon all living things,
      and even the scorpions hid under the stones, convulsed with a mad desire
      to sting, he sat motionless in the burning rays, lifting high his blue
      face and shaggy wild beard.
    

      While yet the people were unafraid to speak to him, same one had asked
      him: “Poor Lazarus! Do you find it pleasant to sit so, and look at
      the sun?” And he answered: “Yes, it is pleasant.”
    

      The thought suggested itself to people that the cold of the three days in
      the grave had been so intense, its darkness so deep, that there was not in
      all the earth enough heat or light to warm Lazarus and lighten the gloom
      of his eyes; and inquirers turned away with a sigh.
    

      And when the setting sun, flat and purple-red, descended to earth, Lazarus
      went into the desert and walked straight toward it, as though intending to
      reach it. Always he walked directly toward the sun, and those who tried to
      follow him and find out what he did at night in the desert had indelibly
      imprinted upon their mind’s vision the black silhouette of a tall,
      stout man against the red background of an immense disk. The horrors of
      the night drove them away, and so they never found out what Lazarus did in
      the desert; but the image of the black form against the red was burned
      forever into their brains. Like an animal with a cinder in its eye which
      furiously rubs its muzzle against its paws, they foolishly rubbed their
      eyes; but the impression left by Lazarus was ineffaceable, forgotten only
      in death.
    

      There were people living far away who never saw Lazarus and only heard of
      him. With an audacious curiosity which is stronger than fear and feeds on
      fear, with a secret sneer in their hearts, some of them came to him one
      day as he basked in the sun, and entered into conversation with him. At
      that time his appearance had changed for the better and was not so
      frightful. At first the visitors snapped their fingers and thought
      disapprovingly of the foolish inhabitants of the Holy City. But when the
      short talk came to an end and they went home, their expression was such
      that the inhabitants of the Holy City at once knew their errand and said:
      “Here go some more madmen at whom Lazarus has looked.” The
      speakers raised their hands in silent pity.
    

      Other visitors came, among them brave warriors in cFlinking armour, who
      knew not fear, and happy youths who made merry with laughter and song.
      Busy merchants, jingling their coins, ran in for awhile, and proud
      attendants at the Temple placed their staffs at Lazarus’ door. But
      no one returned the same as he came. A frightful shadow fell upon their
      souls, and gave a new appearance to the old familiar world.
    

      Those who felt any desire to speak, after they had been stricken by the
      gaze of Lazarus, described the change that had come over them somewhat
      like this:
    

All objects seen by the eye and palpable to the hand became empty,
      light and transparent, as though they were light shadows in the darkness;
      and this darkness enveloped the whole universe. It was dispelled neither
      by the sun, nor by the moon, nor by the stars, but embraced the earth like
      a mother, and clothed it in a boundless black veil.
    

Into all bodies it penetrated, even into iron and stone; and the
      particles of the body lost their unity and became lonely. Even to the
      heart of the particles it penetrated, and the particles of the particles
      became lonely.
    

The vast emptiness which surrounds the universe, was not filled with
      things seen, with sun or moon or stars; it stretched boundless,
      penetrating everywhere, disuniting everything, body from body, particle
      from particle.
    

In emptiness the trees spread their roots, themselves empty; in
      emptiness rose phantom temples, palaces and houses—all empty; and in
      the emptiness moved restless Man, himself empty and light, like a shadow.
    

There was no more a sense of time; the beginning of all things and
      their end merged into one. In the very moment when a building was being
      erected and one could hear the builders striking with their hammers, one
      seemed already to see its ruins, and then emptiness where the ruins were.
    

A man was just born, and funeral candles were already lighted at his
      head, and then were extinguished; and soon there was emptiness where
      before had been the man and the candles.


And surrounded by Darkness and Empty Waste, Man trembled hopelessly
      before the dread of the Infinite.
    

      So spoke those who had a desire to speak. But much more could probably
      have been told by those who did not want to talk, and who died in silence.
    

      IV
    

At that time there
      lived in Rome a celebrated sculptor by the name of Aurelius. Out of clay,
      marble and bronze he created forms of gods and men of such beauty that
      this beauty was proclaimed immortal. But he himself was not satisfied, and
      said there was a supreme beauty that he had never succeeded in expressing
      in marble or bronze. “I have not yet gathered the radiance of the
      moon,” he said; “I have not yet caught the glare of the sun.
      There is no soul in my marble, there is no life in my beautiful bronze.”
      And when by moonlight he would slowly wander along the roads, crossing the
      black shadows of the cypress-trees, his white tunic flashing in the
      moonlight, those he met used to laugh good-naturedly and say: “Is it
      moonlight that you are gathering, Aurelius? Why did you not bring some
      baskets along?”
    

      And he, too, would laugh and point to his eyes and say: “Here are
      the baskets in which I gather the light of the moon and the radiance of
      the sun.”
    

      And that was the truth. In his eyes shone moon and sun. But he could not
      transmit the radiance to marble. Therein lay the greatest tragedy of his
      life. He was a descendant of an ancient race of patricians, had a good
      wife and children, and except in this one respect, lacked nothing.
    

      When the dark rumour about Lazarus reached him, he consulted his wife and
      friends and decided to make the long voyage to Judea, in order that he
      might look upon the man miraculously raised from the dead. He felt lonely
      in those days and hoped on the way to renew his jaded energies. What they
      told him about Lazarus did not frighten him. He had meditated much upon
      death. He did not like it, nor did he like those who tried to harmonise it
      with life. On this side, beautiful life; on the other, mysterious death,
      he reasoned, and no better lot could befall a man than to live—to
      enjoy life and the beauty of living. And he already had conceived a desire
      to convince Lazarus of the truth of this view and to return his soul to
      life even as his body had been returned. This task did not appear
      impossible, for the reports about Lazarus, fearsome and strange as they
      were, did not tell the whole truth about him, but only carried a vague
      warning against something awful.
    

      Lazarus was getting up from a stone to follow in the path of the setting
      sun, on the evening when the rich Roman, accompanied by an armed slave,
      approached him, and in a ringing voice called to him: “Lazarus!”
    

      Lazarus saw a proud and beautiful face, made radiant by fame, and white
      garments and precious jewels shining in the sunlight. The ruddy rays of
      the sun lent to the head and face a likeness to dimly shining bronze—that
      was what Lazarus saw. He sank back to his seat obediently, and wearily
      lowered his eyes.
    

      “It is true you are not beautiful, my poor Lazarus,” said the
      Roman quietly, playing with his gold chain. “You are even frightful,
      my poor friend; and death was not lazy the day when you so carelessly fell
      into its arms. But you are as fat as a barrel, and ‘Fat people are
      not bad,’ as the great CÃ¦sar said. I do not understand why people
      are so afraid of you. You will permit me to stay with you over night? It
      is already late, and I have no abode.”
    

      Nobody had ever asked Lazarus to be allowed to pass the night with him.
    

      “I have no bed,” said he.
    

      “I am somewhat of a warrior and can sleep sitting,” replied
      the Roman. “We shall make a light.”
    

      “I have no light.”
    

      “Then we will converse in the darkness like two friends. I suppose
      you have some wine?”
    

      “I have no wine.”
    

      The Roman laughed.
    

      “Now I understand why you are so gloomy and why you do not like your
      second life. No wine? Well, we shall do without. You know there are words
      that go to one’s head even as Falernian wine.”
    

      With a motion of his head he dismissed the slave, and they were alone. And
      again the sculptor spoke, but it seemed as though the sinking sun had
      penetrated into his words. They faded, pale and empty, as if trembling on
      weak feet, as if slipping and falling, drunk with the wine of anguish and
      despair. And black chasms appeared between the two men—like remote
      hints of vast emptiness and vast darkness.
    

      “Now I am your guest and you will not ill-treat me, Lazarus!”
      said the Roman. “Hospitality is binding even upon those who have
      been three days dead. Three days, I am told, you were in the grave. It
      must have been cold there... and it is from there that you have brought
      this bad habit of doing without light and wine. I like a light. It gets
      dark so quickly here. Your eyebrows and forehead have an interesting line:
      even as the ruins of castles covered with the ashes of an earthquake. But
      why in such strange, ugly clothes? I have seen the bridegrooms of your
      country, they wear clothes like that—such ridiculous clothes—such
      awful garments... Are you a bridegroom?”
    

      Already the sun had disappeared. A gigantic black shadow was approaching
      fast from the west, as if prodigious bare feet were rustling over the
      sand. And the chill breezes stole up behind.
    

      “In the darkness you seem even bigger, Lazarus, as though you had
      grown stouter in these few minutes. Do you feed on darkness, perchance?...
      And I would like a light... just a small light... just a small light. And
      I am cold. The nights here are so barbarously cold... If it were not so
      dark, I should say you were looking at me, Lazarus. Yes, it seems, you are
      looking. You are looking. You are looking at me!... I feel it—now
      you are smiling.”
    

      The night had come, and a heavy blackness filled the air.
    

      “How good it will be when the sun rises again to-morrow... You know
      I am a great sculptor... so my friends call me. I create, yes, they say I
      create, but for that daylight is necessary. I give life to cold marble. I
      melt the ringing bronze in the fire, in a bright, hot fire. Why did you
      touch me with your hand?”
    

      “Come,” said Lazarus, “you are my guest.” And they
      went into the house. And the shadows of the long evening fell on the
      earth...
    

      The slave at last grew tired waiting for his master, and when the sun
      stood high he came to the house. And he saw, directly under its burning
      rays, Lazarus and his master sitting close together. They looked straight
      up and were silent.
    

      The slave wept and cried aloud: “Master, what ails you, Master!”
    

      The same day Aurelius left for Rome. The whole way he was thoughtful and
      silent, attentively examining everything, the people, the ship, and the
      sea, as though endeavouring to recall something. On the sea a great storm
      overtook them, and all the while Aurelius remained on deck and gazed
      eagerly at the approaching and falling waves. When he reached home his
      family were shocked at the terrible change in his demeanour, but he calmed
      them with the words: “I have found it!”
    

      In the dusty clothes which he had worn during the entire journey and had
      not changed, he began his work, and the marble ringingly responded to the
      resounding blows of the hammer. Long and eagerly he worked, admitting no
      one. At last, one morning, he announced that the work was ready, and gave
      instructions that all his friends, and the severe critics and judges of
      art, be called together. Then he donned gorgeous garments, shining with
      gold, glowing with the purple of the byssin.
    

      “Here is what I have created,” he said thoughtfully.
    

      His friends looked, and immediately the shadow of deep sorrow covered
      their faces. It was a thing monstrous, possessing none of the forms
      familiar to the eye, yet not devoid of a hint of some new unknown form. On
      a thin tortuous little branch, or rather an ugly likeness of one, lay
      crooked, strange, unsightly, shapeless heaps of something turned outside
      in, or something turned inside out—wild fragments which seemed to be
      feebly trying to get away from themselves. And, accidentally, under one of
      the wild projections, they noticed a wonderfully sculptured butterfly,
      with transparent wings, trembling as though with a weak longing to fly.
    

      “Why that wonderful butterfly, Aurelius?” timidly asked some
      one.
    

      “I do not know,” answered the sculptor.
    

      The truth had to be told, and one of his friends, the one who loved
      Aurelius best, said: “This is ugly, my poor friend. It must be
      destroyed. Give me the hammer.” And with two blows he destroyed the
      monstrous mass, leaving only the wonderfully sculptured butterfly.
    

      After that Aurelius created nothing. He looked with absolute indifference
      at marble and at bronze and at his own divine creations, in which dwelt
      immortal beauty. In the hope of breathing into him once again the old
      flame of inspiration, with the idea of awakening his dead soul, his
      friends led him to see the beautiful creations of others, but he remained
      indifferent and no smile warmed his closed lips. And only after they spoke
      to him much and long of beauty, he would reply wearily:
    

      “But all this is—a lie.”
    

      And in the daytime, when the sun was shining, he would go into his rich
      and beautifully laid-out garden, and finding a place where there was no
      shadow, would expose his bare head and his dull eyes to the glitter and
      burning heat of the sun. Red and white butterflies fluttered around; down
      into the marble cistern ran splashing water from the crooked mouth of a
      blissfully drunken Satyr; but he sat motionless, like a pale shadow of
      that other one who, in a far land, at the very gates of the stony desert,
      also sat motionless under the fiery sun.
    

      V
    

And it came about
      finally that Lazarus was summoned to Rome by the great Augustus.
    

      They dressed him in gorgeous garments as though it had been ordained that
      he was to remain a bridegroom to an unknown bride until the very day of
      his death. It was as if an old coffin, rotten and falling apart, were
      regilded over and over, and gay tassels were hung on it. And solemnly they
      conducted him in gala attire, as though in truth it were a bridal
      procession, the runners loudly sounding the trumpet that the way be made
      for the ambassadors of the Emperor. But the roads along which he passed
      were deserted. His entire native land cursed the execrable name of
      Lazarus, the man miraculously brought to life, and the people scattered at
      the mere report of his horrible approach. The trumpeters blew lonely
      blasts, and only the desert answered with a dying echo.
    

      Then they carried him across the sea on the saddest and most gorgeous ship
      that was ever mirrored in the azure waves of the Mediterranean. There were
      many people aboard, but the ship was silent and still as a coffin, and the
      water seemed to moan as it parted before the short curved prow. Lazarus
      sat lonely, baring his head to the sun, and listening in silence to the
      splashing of the waters. Further away the seamen and the ambassadors
      gathered like a crowd of distressed shadows. If a thunderstorm had
      happened to burst upon them at that time or the wind had overwhelmed the
      red sails, the ship would probably have perished, for none of those who
      were on her had strength or desire enough to fight for life. With supreme
      effort some went to the side of the ship and eagerly gazed at the blue,
      transparent abyss. Perhaps they imagined they saw a naiad flashing a pink
      shoulder through the waves, or an insanely joyous and drunken centaur
      galloping by, splashing up the water with his hoofs. But the sea was
      deserted and mute, and so was the watery abyss.
    

      Listlessly Lazarus set foot on the streets of the Eternal City, as though
      all its riches, all the majesty of its gigantic edifices, all the lustre
      and beauty and music of refined life, were simply the echo of the wind in
      the desert, or the misty images of hot running sand. Chariots whirled by;
      the crowd of strong, beautiful, haughty men passed on, builders of the
      Eternal City and proud partakers of its life; songs rang out; fountains
      laughed; pearly laughter of women filled the air, while the drunkard
      philosophised and the sober ones smilingly listened; horseshoes rattled on
      the pavement. And surrounded on all sides by glad sounds, a fat, heavy man
      moved through the centre of the city like a cold spot of silence, sowing
      in his path grief, anger and vague, carking distress. Who dared to be sad
      in Rome? indignantly demanded frowning citizens; and in two days the
      swift-tongued Rome knew of Lazarus, the man miraculously raised from the
      grave, and timidly evaded him.
    

      There were many brave men ready to try their strength, and at their
      senseless call Lazarus came obediently. The Emperor was so engrossed with
      state affairs that he delayed receiving the visitor, and for seven days
      Lazarus moved among the people.
    

      A jovial drunkard met him with a smile on his red lips. “Drink,
      Lazarus, drink!” he cried, “Would not Augustus laugh to see
      you drink!” And naked, besotted women laughed, and decked the blue
      hands of Lazarus with rose-leaves. But the drunkard looked into the eyes
      of Lazarus—and his joy ended forever. Thereafter he was always
      drunk. He drank no more, but was drunk all the time, shadowed by fearful
      dreams, instead of the joyous reveries that wine gives. Fearful dreams
      became the food of his broken spirit. Fearful dreams held him day and
      night in the mists of monstrous fantasy, and death itself was no more
      fearful than the apparition of its fierce precursor.
    

      Lazarus came to a youth and his lass who loved each other and were
      beautiful in their love. Proudly and strongly holding in his arms his
      beloved one, the youth said, with gentle pity: “Look at us, Lazarus,
      and rejoice with us. Is there anything stronger than love?”
    

      And Lazarus looked at them. And their whole life they continued to love
      one another, but their love became mournful and gloomy, even as those
      cypress trees over the tombs that feed their roots on the putrescence of
      the grave, and strive in vain in the quiet evening hour to touch the sky
      with their pointed tops. Hurled by fathomless life-forces into each other’s
      arms, they mingled their kisses with tears, their joy with pain, and only
      succeeded in realising the more vividly a sense of their slavery to the
      silent Nothing. Forever united, forever parted, they flashed like sparks,
      and like sparks went out in boundless darkness.
    

      Lazarus came to a proud sage, and the sage said to him: “I already
      know all the horrors that you may tell me, Lazarus. With what else can you
      terrify me?”
    

      Only a few moments passed before the sage realised that the knowledge of
      the horrible is not the horrible, and that the sight of death is not
      death. And he felt that in the eyes of the Infinite wisdom and folly are
      the same, for the Infinite knows them not. And the boundaries between
      knowledge and ignorance, between truth and falsehood, between top and
      bottom, faded and his shapeless thought was suspended in emptiness. Then
      he grasped his grey head in his hands and cried out insanely: “I
      cannot think! I cannot think!”
    

      Thus it was that under the cool gaze of Lazarus, the man miraculously
      raised from the dead, all that serves to affirm life, its sense and its
      joys, perished. And people began to say it was dangerous to allow him to
      see the Emperor; that it were better to kill him and bury him secretly,
      and swear he had disappeared. Swords were sharpened and youths devoted to
      the welfare of the people announced their readiness to become assassins,
      when Augustus upset the cruel plans by demanding that Lazarus appear
      before him.
    

      Even though Lazarus could not be kept away, it was felt that the heavy
      impression conveyed by his face might be somewhat softened. With that end
      in view expert painters, barbers and artists were secured who worked the
      whole night on Lazarus’ head. His beard was trimmed and curled. The
      disagreeable and deadly bluishness of his hands and face was covered up
      with paint; his hands were whitened, his cheeks rouged. The disgusting
      wrinkles of suffering that ridged his old face were patched up and
      painted, and on the smooth surface, wrinkles of good-nature and laughter,
      and of pleasant, good-humoured cheeriness, were laid on artistically with
      fine brushes.
    

      Lazarus submitted indifferently to all they did with him, and soon was
      transformed into a stout, nice-looking old man, for all the world a quiet
      and good-humoured grandfather of numerous grandchildren. He looked as
      though the smile with which he told funny stories had not left his lips,
      as though a quiet tenderness still lay hidden in the corner of his eyes.
      But the wedding-dress they did not dare to take off; and they could not
      change his eyes—the dark, terrible eyes from out of which stared the
      incomprehensible There.
    

      VI
    

Lazarus was
      untouched by the magnificence of the imperial apartments. He remained
      stolidly indifferent, as though he saw no contrast between his ruined
      house at the edge of the desert and the solid, beautiful palace of stone.
      Under his feet the hard marble of the floor took on the semblance of the
      moving sands of the desert, and to his eyes the throngs of gaily dressed,
      haughty men were as unreal as the emptiness of the air. They looked not
      into his face as he passed by, fearing to come under the awful bane of his
      eyes; but when the sound of his heavy steps announced that he had passed,
      heads were lifted, and eyes examined with timid curiosity the figure of
      the corpulent, tall, slightly stooping old man, as he slowly passed into
      the heart of the imperial palace. If death itself had appeared men would
      not have feared it so much; for hitherto death had been known to the dead
      only, and life to the living only, and between these two there had been no
      bridge. But this strange being knew death, and that knowledge of his was
      felt to be mysterious and cursed. “He will kill our great, divine
      Augustus,” men cried with horror, and they hurled curses after him.
      Slowly and stolidly he passed them by, penetrating ever deeper into the
      palace.
    

      Caesar knew already who Lazarus was, and was prepared to meet him. He was
      a courageous man; he felt his power was invincible, and in the fateful
      encounter with the man “wonderfully raised from the dead” he
      refused to lean on other men’s weak help. Man to man, face to face,
      he met Lazarus.
    

      “Do not fix your gaze on me, Lazarus,” he commanded. “I
      have heard that your head is like the head of Medusa, and turns into stone
      all upon whom you look. But I should like to have a close look at you, and
      to talk to you before I turn into stone,” he added in a spirit of
      playfulness that concealed his real misgivings.
    

      Approaching him, he examined closely Lazarus’ face and his strange
      festive clothes. Though his eyes were sharp and keen, he was deceived by
      the skilful counterfeit.
    

      “Well, your appearance is not terrible, venerable sir. But all the
      worse for men, when the terrible takes on such a venerable and pleasant
      appearance. Now let us talk.”
    

      Augustus sat down, and as much by glance as by words began the discussion.
      “Why did you not salute me when you entered?”
    

      Lazarus answered indifferently: “I did not know it was necessary.”
    

      “You are a Christian?”
    

      “No.”
    

      Augustus nodded approvingly. “That is good. I do not like the
      Christians. They shake the tree of life, forbidding it to bear fruit, and
      they scatter to the wind its fragrant blossoms. But who are you?”
    

      With some effort Lazarus answered: “I was dead.”
    

      “I heard about that. But who are you now?”
    

      Lazarus’ answer came slowly. Finally he said again, listlessly and
      indistinctly: “I was dead.”
    

      “Listen to me, stranger,” said the Emperor sharply, giving
      expression to what had been in his mind before. “My empire is an
      empire of the living; my people are a people of the living and not of the
      dead. You are superfluous here. I do not know who you are, I do not know
      what you have seen There, but if you lie, I hate your lies, and if you
      tell the truth, I hate your truth. In my heart I feel the pulse of life;
      in my hands I feel power, and my proud thoughts, like eagles, fly through
      space. Behind my back, under the protection of my authority, under the
      shadow of the laws I have created, men live and labour and rejoice. Do you
      hear this divine harmony of life? Do you hear the war cry that men hurl
      into the face of the future, challenging it to strife?”
    

      Augustus extended his arms reverently and solemnly cried out: “Blessed
      art thou, Great Divine Life!”
    

      But Lazarus was silent, and the Emperor continued more severely: “You
      are not wanted here. Pitiful remnant, half devoured of death, you fill men
      with distress and aversion to life. Like a caterpillar on the fields, you
      are gnawing away at the full seed of joy, exuding the slime of despair and
      sorrow. Your truth is like a rusted sword in the hands of a night
      assassin, and I shall condemn you to death as an assassin. But first I
      want to look into your eyes. Mayhap only cowards fear them, and brave men
      are spurred on to struggle and victory. Then will you merit not death but
      a reward. Look at me, Lazarus.”
    

      At first it seemed to divine Augustus as if a friend were looking at him,
      so soft, so alluring, so gently fascinating was the gaze of Lazarus. It
      promised not horror but quiet rest, and the Infinite dwelt there as a fond
      mistress, a compassionate sister, a mother. And ever stronger grew its
      gentle embrace, until he felt, as it were, the breath of a mouth hungry
      for kisses... Then it seemed as if iron bones protruded in a ravenous
      grip, and closed upon him in an iron band; and cold nails touched his
      heart, and slowly, slowly sank into it.
    

      “It pains me,” said divine Augustus, growing pale; “but
      look, Lazarus, look!”
    

      Ponderous gates, shutting off eternity, appeared to be slowly swinging
      open, and through the growing aperture poured in, coldly and calmly, the
      awful horror of the Infinite. Boundless Emptiness and Boundless Gloom
      entered like two shadows, extinguishing the sun, removing the ground from
      under the feet, and the cover from over the head. And the pain in his icy
      heart ceased.
    

      “Look at me, look at me, Lazarus!” commanded Augustus,
      staggering...
    

      Time ceased and the beginning of things came perilously near to the end.
      The throne of Augustus, so recently erected, fell to pieces, and emptiness
      took the place of the throne and of Augustus. Rome fell silently into
      ruins. A new city rose in its place, and it too was erased by emptiness.
      Like phantom giants, cities, kingdoms, and countries swiftly fell and
      disappeared into emptiness—swallowed up in the black maw of the
      Infinite...
    

      “Cease,” commanded the Emperor. Already the accent of
      indifference was in his voice. His arms hung powerless, and his eagle eyes
      flashed and were dimmed again, struggling against overwhelming darkness.
    

      “You have killed me, Lazarus,” he said drowsily.
    

      These words of despair saved him. He thought of the people, whose shield
      he was destined to be, and a sharp, redeeming pang pierced his dull heart.
      He thought of them doomed to perish, and he was filled with anguish. First
      they seemed bright shadows in the gloom of the Infinite.—How
      terrible! Then they appeared as fragile vessels with life-agitated blood,
      and hearts that knew both sorrow and great joy.—And he thought of
      them with tenderness.
    

      And so thinking and feeling, inclining the scales now to the side of life,
      now to the side of death, he slowly returned to life, to find in its
      suffering and joy a refuge from the gloom, emptiness and fear of the
      Infinite.
    

      “No, you did not kill me, Lazarus,” said he firmly. “But
      I will kill you. Go!”
    

      Evening came and divine Augustus partook of food and drink with great joy.
      But there were moments when his raised arm would remain suspended in the
      air, and the light of his shining, eager eyes was dimmed. It seemed as if
      an icy wave of horror washed against his feet. He was vanquished but not
      killed, and coldly awaited his doom, like a black shadow. His nights were
      haunted by horror, but the bright days still brought him the joys, as well
      as the sorrows, of life.
    

      Next day, by order of the Emperor, they burned out Lazarus’ eyes
      with hot irons and sent him home. Even Augustus dared not kill him.
    








      Lazarus returned to the desert and the desert received him with the breath
      of the hissing wind and the ardour of the glowing sun. Again he sat on the
      stone with matted beard uplifted; and two black holes, where the eyes had
      once been, looked dull and horrible at the sky. In the distance the Holy
      City surged and roared restlessly, but near him all was deserted and
      still. No one approached the place where Lazarus, miraculously raised from
      the dead, passed his last days, for his neighbours had long since
      abandoned their homes. His cursed knowledge, driven by the hot irons from
      his eyes deep into the brain, lay there in ambush; as if from ambush it
      might spring out upon men with a thousand unseen eyes. No one dared to
      look at Lazarus.
    

      And in the evening, when the sun, swollen crimson and growing larger, bent
      its way toward the west, blind Lazarus slowly groped after it. He stumbled
      against stones and fell; corpulent and feeble, he rose heavily and walked
      on; and against the red curtain of sunset his dark form and outstretched
      arms gave him the semblance of a cross.
    

      It happened once that he went and never returned. Thus ended the second
      life of Lazarus, who for three days had been in the mysterious thraldom of
      death and then was miraculously raised from the dead.
    











      THE REVOLUTIONIST
    

      BY MICHAÃL P. ARTZYBASHEV
    

      I
    

Gabriel Andersen,
      the teacher, walked to the edge of the school garden, where he paused,
      undecided what to do. Off in the distance, two miles away, the woods hung
      like bluish lace over a field of pure snow. It was a brilliant day. A
      hundred tints glistened on the white ground and the iron bars of the
      garden railing. There was a lightness and transparency in the air that
      only the days of early spring possess. Gabriel Andersen turned his steps
      toward the fringe of blue lace for a tramp in the woods.
    

      “Another spring in my life,” he said, breathing deep and
      peering up at the heavens through his spectacles. Andersen was rather
      given to sentimental poetising. He walked with his hands folded behind
      him, dangling his cane.
    

      He had gone but a few paces when he noticed a group of soldiers and horses
      on the road beyond the garden rail. Their drab uniforms stood out dully
      against the white of the snow, but their swords and horses’ coats
      tossed back the light. Their bowed cavalry legs moved awkwardly on the
      snow. Andersen wondered what they were doing there. Suddenly the nature of
      their business flashed upon him. It was an ugly errand they were upon, an
      instinct rather that his reason told him. Something unusual and terrible
      was to happen. And the same instinct told him he must conceal himself from
      the soldiers. He turned to the left quickly, dropped on his knees, and
      crawled on the soft, thawing, crackling snow to a low haystack, from
      behind which, by craning his neck, he could watch what the soldiers were
      doing.
    

      There were twelve of them, one a stocky young officer in a grey cloak
      caught in prettily at the waist by a silver belt. His face was so red that
      even at that distance Andersen caught the odd, whitish gleam of his light
      protruding moustache and eyebrows against the vivid colour of his skin.
      The broken tones of his raucous voice reached distinctly to where the
      teacher, listening intently, lay hidden.
    

      “I know what I am about. I don’t need anybody’s advice,”
      the officer cried. He clapped his arms akimbo and looked down at some one
      among the group of bustling soldiers. “I’ll show you how to be
      a rebel, you damned skunk.”
    

      Andersen’s heart beat fast. “Good heavens!” he thought.
      “Is it possible?” His head grew chill as if struck by a cold
      wave.
    

      “Officer,” a quiet, restrained, yet distinct voice came from
      among the soldiers, “you have no right—It’s for the
      court to decide—you aren’t a judge—it’s plain
      murder, not—” “Silence!” thundered the officer,
      his voice choking with rage. “I’ll give you a court. Ivanov,
      go ahead.”
    

      He put the spurs to his horse and rode away. Gabriel Andersen mechanically
      observed how carefully the horse picked its way, placing its feet daintily
      as if for the steps of a minuet. Its ears were pricked to catch every
      sound. There was momentary bustle and excitement among the soldiers. Then
      they dispersed in different directions, leaving three persons in black
      behind, two tall men and one very short and frail. Andersen could see the
      hair of the short one’s head. It was very light. And he saw his rosy
      ears sticking out on each side.
    

      Now he fully understood what was to happen. But it was a thing so out of
      the ordinary, so horrible, that he fancied he was dreaming.
    

      “It’s so bright, so beautiful—the snow, the field, the
      woods, the sky. The breath of spring is upon everything. Yet people are
      going to be killed. How can it be? Impossible!” So his thoughts ran
      in confusion. He had the sensation of a man suddenly gone insane, who
      finds he sees, hears and feels what he is not accustomed to, and ought not
      hear, see and feel.
    

      The three men in black stood next to one another hard by the railing, two
      quite close together, the short one some distance away.
    

      “Officer!” one of them cried in a desperate voice—Andersen
      could not see which it was—“God sees us! Officer!”
    

      Eight soldiers dismounted quickly, their spurs and sabres catching
      awkwardly. Evidently they were in a hurry, as if doing a thief’s
      job.
    

      Several seconds passed in silence until the soldiers placed themselves in
      a row a few feet from the black figures and levelled their guns. In doing
      so one soldier knocked his cap from his head. He picked it up and put it
      on again without brushing off the wet snow.
    

      The officer’s mount still kept dancing on one spot with his ears
      pricked, while the other horses, also with sharp ears erect to catch every
      sound, stood motionless looking at the men in black, their long wise heads
      inclined to one side.
    

      “Spare the boy at least!” another voice suddenly pierced the
      air. “Why kill a child, damn you! What has the child done?”
    

      “Ivanov, do what I told you to do,” thundered the officer,
      drowning the other voice. His face turned as scarlet as a piece of red
      flannel.
    

      There followed a scene savage and repulsive in its gruesomeness. The short
      figure in black, with the light hair and the rosy ears, uttered a wild
      shriek in a shrill child’s tones and reeled to one side. Instantly
      it was caught up by two or three soldiers. But the boy began to struggle,
      and two more soldiers ran up.
    

      “Ow-ow-ow-ow!” the boy cried. “Let me go, let me go!
      Ow-ow!”
    

      His shrill voice cut the air like the yell of a stuck porkling not quite
      done to death. Suddenly he grew quiet. Some one must have struck him. An
      unexpected, oppressive silence ensued. The boy was being pushed forward.
      Then there came a deafening report. Andersen started back all in a
      tremble. He saw distinctly, yet vaguely as in a dream, the dropping of two
      dark bodies, the flash of pale sparks, and a light smoke rising in the
      clean, bright atmosphere. He saw the soldiers hastily mounting their
      horses without even glancing at the bodies. He saw them galloping along
      the muddy road, their arms clanking, their horses’ hoofs clattering.
    

      He saw all this, himself now standing in the middle of the road, not
      knowing when and why he had jumped from behind the haystack. He was
      deathly pale. His face was covered with dank sweat, his body was aquiver.
      A physical sadness smote and tortured him. He could not make out the
      nature of the feeling. It was akin to extreme sickness, though far more
      nauseating and terrible.
    

      After the soldiers had disappeared beyond the bend toward the woods,
      people came hurrying to the spot of the shooting, though till then not a
      soul had been in sight.
    

      The bodies lay at the roadside on the other side of the railing, where the
      snow was clean, brittle and untrampled and glistened cheerfully in the
      bright atmosphere. There were three dead bodies, two men and a boy. The
      boy lay with his long soft neck stretched on the snow. The face of the man
      next to the boy was invisible. He had fallen face downward in a pool of
      blood. The third was a big man with a black beard and huge, muscular arms.
      He lay stretched out to the full length of his big body, his arms extended
      over a large area of blood-stained snow.
    

      The three men who had been shot lay black against the white snow,
      motionless. From afar no one could have told the terror that was in their
      immobility as they lay there at the edge of the narrow road crowded with
      people.
    

      That night Gabriel Andersen in his little room in the schoolhouse did not
      write poems as usual. He stood at the window and looked at the distant
      pale disk of the moon in the misty blue sky, and thought. And his thoughts
      were confused, gloomy, and heavy as if a cloud had descended upon his
      brain.
    

      Indistinctly outlined in the dull moonlight he saw the dark railing, the
      trees, the empty garden. It seemed to him that he beheld them—the
      three men who had been shot, two grown up, one a child. They were lying
      there now at the roadside, in the empty, silent field, looking at the
      far-off cold moon with their dead, white eyes as he with his living eyes.
    

      “The time will come some day,” he thought, “when the
      killing of people by others will be an utter impossibility. The time will
      come when even the soldiers and officers who killed these three men will
      realise what they have done and will understand that what they killed them
      for is just as necessary, important, and dear to them—to the
      officers and soldiers—as to those whom they killed.”
    

      “Yes,” he said aloud and solemnly, his eyes moistening,
      “that time will come. They will understand.” And the pale disk
      of the moon was blotted out by the moisture in his eyes.
    

      A large pity pierced his heart for the three victims whose eyes looked at
      the moon, sad and unseeing. A feeling of rage cut him as with a sharp
      knife and took possession of him.
    

      But Gabriel Andersen quieted his heart, whispering softly, “They
      know not what they do.” And this old and ready phrase gave him the
      strength to stifle his rage and indignation.
    

      II
    

The day was as
      bright and white, but the spring was already advanced. The wet soil smelt
      of spring. Clear cold water ran everywhere from under the loose, thawing
      snow. The branches of the trees were springy and elastic. For miles and
      miles around, the country opened up in clear azure stretches.
    

      Yet the clearness and the joy of the spring day were not in the village.
      They were somewhere outside the village, where there were no people—in
      the fields, the woods and the mountains. In the village the air was
      stifling, heavy and terrible as in a nightmare.
    

      Gabriel Andersen stood in the road near a crowd of dark, sad,
      absent-minded people and craned his neck to see the preparations for the
      flogging of seven peasants.
    

      They stood in the thawing snow, and Gabriel Andersen could not persuade
      himself that they were people whom he had long known and understood. By
      that which was about to happen to them, the shameful, terrible,
      ineradicable thing that was to happen to them, they were separated from
      all the rest of the world, and so were unable to feel what he, Gabriel
      Andersen, felt, just as he was unable to feel what they felt. Round them
      were the soldiers, confidently and beautifully mounted on high upon their
      large steeds, who tossed their wise heads and turned their dappled wooden
      faces slowly from side to side, looking contemptuously at him, Gabriel
      Andersen, who was soon to behold this horror, this disgrace, and would do
      nothing, would not dare to do anything. So it seemed to Gabriel Andersen;
      and a sense of cold, intolerable shame gripped him as between two clamps
      of ice through which he could see everything without being able to move,
      cry out or utter a groan.
    

      They took the first peasant. Gabriel Andersen saw his strange, imploring,
      hopeless look. His lips moved, but no sound was heard, and his eyes
      wandered. There was a bright gleam in them as in the eyes of a madman. His
      mind, it was evident, was no longer able to comprehend what was happening.
    

      And so terrible was that face, at once full of reason and of madness, that
      Andersen felt relieved when they put him face downward on the snow and,
      instead of the fiery eyes, he saw his bare back glistening—a
      senseless, shameful, horrible sight.
    

      The large, red-faced soldier in a red cap pushed toward him, looked down
      at his body with seeming delight, and then cried in a clear voice:
    

      “Well, let her go, with God’s blessing!”
    

      Andersen seemed not to see the soldiers, the sky, the horses or the crowd.
      He did not feel the cold, the terror or the shame. He did not hear the
      swish of the knout in the air or the savage howl of pain and despair. He
      only saw the bare back of a man’s body swelling up and covered over
      evenly with white and purple stripes. Gradually the bare back lost the
      semblance of human flesh. The blood oozed and squirted, forming patches,
      drops and rivulets, which ran down on the white, thawing snow.
    

      Terror gripped the soul of Gabriel Andersen as he thought of the moment
      when the man would rise and face all the people who had seen his body
      bared out in the open and reduced to a bloody pulp. He closed his eyes.
      When he opened them, he saw four soldiers in uniform and red hats forcing
      another man down on the snow, his back bared just as shamefully, terribly
      and absurdly—a ludicrously tragic sight.
    

      Then came the third, the fourth, and so on, to the end.
    

      And Gabriel Andersen stood on the wet, thawing snow, craning his neck,
      trembling and stuttering, though he did not say a word. Dank sweat poured
      from his body. A sense of shame permeated his whole being. It was a
      humiliating feeling, having to escape being noticed so that they should
      not catch him and lay him there on the snow and strip him bare—him,
      Gabriel Andersen.
    

      The soldiers pressed and crowded, the horses tossed their heads, the knout
      swished in the air, and the bare, shamed human flesh swelled up, tore, ran
      over with blood, and curled like a snake. Oaths, wild shrieks rained upon
      the village through the clean white air of that spring day.
    

      Andersen now saw five men’s faces at the steps of the town hall, the
      faces of those men who had already undergone their shame. He quickly
      turned his eyes away. After seeing this a man must die, he thought.
    

      III
    

There were
      seventeen of them, fifteen soldiers, a subaltern and a young beardless
      officer. The officer lay in front of the fire looking intently into the
      flames. The soldiers were tinkering with the firearms in the wagon.
    

      Their grey figures moved about quietly on the black thawing ground, and
      occasionally stumbled across the logs sticking out from the blazing fire.
    

      Gabriel Andersen, wearing an overcoat and carrying his cane behind his
      back, approached them. The subaltern, a stout fellow with a moustache,
      jumped up, turned from the fire, and looked at him.
    

      “Who are you? What do you want?” he asked excitedly. From his
      tone it was evident that the soldiers feared everybody in that district,
      through which they went scattering death, destruction and torture.
    

      “Officer,” he said, “there is a man here I don’t
      know.”
    

      The officer looked at Andersen without speaking.
    

      “Officer,” said Andersen in a thin, strained voice, “my
      name is Michelson. I am a business man here, and I am going to the village
      on business. I was afraid I might be mistaken for some one else—you
      know.”
    

      “Then what are you nosing about here for?” the officer said
      angrily, and turned away.
    

      “A business man,” sneered a soldier. “He ought to be
      searched, this business man ought, so as not to be knocking about at
      night. A good one in the jaw is what he needs.”
    

      “He’s a suspicious character, officer,” said the
      subaltern. “Don’t you think we’d better arrest him,
      what?”
    

      “Don’t,” answered the officer lazily. “I’m
      sick of them, damn ‘em.”
    

      Gabriel Andersen stood there without saying anything. His eyes flashed
      strangely in the dark by the firelight. And it was strange to see his
      short, substantial, clean, neat figure in the field at night among the
      soldiers, with his overcoat and cane and glasses glistening in the
      firelight.
    

      The soldiers left him and walked away. Gabriel Andersen remained standing
      for a while. Then he turned and left, rapidly disappearing in the
      darkness.
    

      The night was drawing to a close. The air turned chilly, and the tops of
      the bushes defined themselves more clearly in the dark. Gabriel Andersen
      went again to the military post. But this time he hid, crouching low as he
      made his way under the cover of the bushes. Behind him people moved about
      quietly and carefully, bending the bushes, silent as shadows. Next to
      Gabriel, on his right, walked a tall man with a revolver in his hand.
    

      The figure of a soldier on the hill outlined itself strangely,
      unexpectedly, not where they had been looking for it. It was faintly
      illumined by the gleam from the dying fire. Gabriel Andersen recognised
      the soldier. It was the one who had proposed that he should be searched.
      Nothing stirred in Andersen’s heart. His face was cold and
      motionless, as of a man who is asleep. Round the fire the soldiers lay
      stretched out sleeping, all except the subaltern, who sat with his head
      drooping over his knees.
    

      The tall thin man on Andersen’s right raised the revolver and pulled
      the trigger. A momentary blinding flash, a deafening report.
    

      Andersen saw the guard lift his hands and then sit down on the ground
      clasping his bosom. From all directions short, crackling sparks flashed up
      which combined into one riving roar. The subaltern jumped up and dropped
      straight into the fire. Grey soldiers’ figures moved about in all
      directions like apparitions, throwing up their hands and falling and
      writhing on the black earth. The young officer ran past Andersen,
      fluttering his hands like some strange, frightened bird. Andersen, as if
      he were thinking of something else, raised his cane. With all his strength
      he hit the officer on the head, each blow descending with a dull, ugly
      thud. The officer reeled in a circle, struck a bush, and sat down after
      the second blow, covering his head with both hands, as children do. Some
      one ran up and discharged a revolver as if from Andersen’s own hand.
      The officer sank together in a heap and lunged with great force head
      foremost on the ground. His legs twitched for a while, then he curled up
      quietly.
    

      The shots ceased. Black men with white faces, ghostly grey in the dark,
      moved about the dead bodies of the soldiers, taking away their arms and
      ammunition.
    

      Andersen watched all this with a cold, attentive stare. When all was over,
      he went up, took hold of the burned subaltern’s legs, and tried to
      remove the body from the fire. But it was too heavy for him, and he let it
      go.
    

      IV
    

Andersen sat
      motionless on the steps of the town hall, and thought. He thought of how
      he, Gabriel Andersen, with his spectacles, cane, overcoat and poems, had
      lied and betrayed fifteen men. He thought it was terrible, yet there was
      neither pity, shame nor regret in his heart. Were he to be set free, he
      knew that he, Gabriel Andersen, with the spectacles and poems, would go
      straightway and do it again. He tried to examine himself, to see what was
      going on inside his soul. But his thoughts were heavy and confused. For
      some reason it was more painful for him to think of the three men lying on
      the snow, looking at the pale disk of the far-off moon with their dead,
      unseeing eyes, than of the murdered officer whom he had struck two dry,
      ugly blows on the head. Of his own death he did not think. It seemed to
      him that he had done with everything long, long ago. Something had died,
      had gone out and left him empty, and he must not think about it.
    

      And when they grabbed him by the shoulder and he rose, and they quickly
      led him through the garden where the cabbages raised their dry heads, he
      could not formulate a single thought.
    

      He was conducted to the road and placed at the railing with his back to
      one of the iron bars. He fixed his spectacles, put his hands behind him,
      and stood there with his neat, stocky body, his head slightly inclined to
      one side.
    

      At the last moment he looked in front of him and saw rifle barrels
      pointing at his head, chest and stomach, and pale faces with trembling
      lips. He distinctly saw how one barrel levelled at his forehead suddenly
      dropped.
    

      Something strange and incomprehensible, as if no longer of this world, no
      longer earthly, passed through Andersen’s mind. He straightened
      himself to the full height of his short body and threw back his head in
      simple pride. A strange indistinct sense of cleanness, strength and pride
      filled his soul, and everything—the sun and the sky and the people
      and the field and death—seemed to him insignificant, remote and
      useless.
    

      The bullets hit him in the chest, in the left eye, in the stomach, went
      through his clean coat buttoned all the way up. His glasses shivered into
      bits. He uttered a shriek, circled round, and fell with his face against
      one of the iron bars, his one remaining eye wide open. He clawed the
      ground with his outstretched hands as if trying to support himself.
    

      The officer, who had turned green, rushed toward him, and senselessly
      thrust the revolver against his neck, and fired twice. Andersen stretched
      out on the ground.
    

      The soldiers left quickly. But Andersen remained pressed flat to the
      ground. The index finger of his left hand continued to quiver for about
      ten seconds.
    











      THE OUTRAGE—A TRUE STORY
    

      BY ALEKSANDR I. KUPRIN
    

It was five o’clock
      on a July afternoon. The heat was terrible. The whole of the huge
      stone-built town breathed out heat like a glowing furnace. The glare of
      the white-walled house was insufferable. The asphalt pavements grew soft
      and burned the feet. The shadows of the acacias spread over the cobbled
      road, pitiful and weary. They too seemed hot. The sea, pale in the
      sunlight, lay heavy and immobile as one dead. Over the streets hung a
      white dust.
    

      In the foyer of one of the private theatres a small committee of local
      barristers who had undertaken to conduct the cases of those who had
      suffered in the last pogrom against the Jews was reaching the end of its
      daily task. There were nineteen of them, all juniors, young, progressive
      and conscientious men. The sitting was without formality, and white suits
      of duck, flannel and alpaca were in the majority. They sat anywhere, at
      little marble tables, and the chairman stood in front of an empty counter
      where chocolates were sold in the winter.
    

      The barristers were quite exhausted by the heat which poured in through
      the windows, with the dazzling sunlight and the noise of the streets. The
      proceedings went lazily and with a certain irritation.
    

      A tall young man with a fair moustache and thin hair was in the chair. He
      was dreaming voluptuously how he would be off in an instant on his
      new-bought bicycle to the bungalow. He would undress quickly, and without
      waiting to cool, still bathed in sweat, would fling himself into the
      clear, cold, sweet-smelling sea. His whole body was enervated and tense,
      thrilled by the thought. Impatiently moving the papers before him, he
      spoke in a drowsy voice.
    

      “So, Joseph Moritzovich will conduct the case of Rubinchik...
      Perhaps there is still a statement to be made on the order of the day?”
    

      His youngest colleague, a short, stout Karaite, very black and lively,
      said in a whisper so that every one could hear: “On the order of the
      day, the best thing would be iced kvas...”
    

      The chairman gave him a stern side-glance, but could not restrain a smile.
      He sighed and put both his hands on the table to raise himself and declare
      the meeting closed, when the doorkeeper, who stood at the entrance to the
      theatre, suddenly moved forward and said: “There are seven people
      outside, sir. They want to come in.”
    

      The chairman looked impatiently round the company.
    

      “What is to be done, gentlemen?”
    

      Voices were heard.
    

      “Next time. Basta!”
    

      “Let ‘em put it in writing.”
    

      “If they’ll get it over quickly... Decide it at once.”
    

      “Let ‘em go to the devil. Phew! It’s like boiling pitch.”
    

      “Let them in.” The chairman gave a sign with his head,
      annoyed. “Then bring me a Vichy, please. But it must be cold.”
    

      The porter opened the door and called down the corridor: “Come in.
      They say you may.”
    

      Then seven of the most surprising and unexpected individuals filed into
      the foyer. First appeared a full-grown, confident man in a smart suit, of
      the colour of dry sea-sand, in a magnificent pink shirt with white stripes
      and a crimson rose in his buttonhole. From the front his head looked like
      an upright bean, from the side like a horizontal bean. His face was
      adorned with a strong, bushy, martial moustache. He wore dark blue
      pince-nez on his nose, on his hands straw-coloured gloves. In his left
      hand he held a black walking-stick with a silver mount, in his right a
      light blue handkerchief.
    

      The other six produced a strange, chaotic, incongruous impression, exactly
      as though they had all hastily pooled not merely their clothes, but their
      hands, feet and heads as well. There was a man with the splendid profile
      of a Roman senator, dressed in rags and tatters. Another wore an elegant
      dress waistcoat, from the deep opening of which a dirty Little-Russian
      shirt leapt to the eye. Here were the unbalanced faces of the criminal
      type, but looking with a confidence that nothing could shake. All these
      men, in spite of their apparent youth, evidently possessed a large
      experience of life, an easy manner, a bold approach, and some hidden,
      suspicious cunning.
    

      The gentleman in the sandy suit bowed just his head, neatly and easily,
      and said with a half-question in his voice: “Mr. Chairman?”
    

      “Yes. I am the chairman. What is your business?”
    

      “We—all whom you see before you,” the gentleman began in
      a quiet voice and turned round to indicate his companions, “we come
      as delegates from the United Rostov-Kharkov-and-Odessa-Nikolayev
      Association of Thieves.”
    

      The barristers began to shift in their seats.
    

      The chairman flung himself back and opened his eyes wide. “Association
      of what?” he said, perplexed.
    

      “The Association of Thieves,” the gentleman in the sandy suit
      coolly repeated. “As for myself, my comrades did me the signal
      honour of electing me as the spokesman of the deputation.”
    

      “Very ... pleased,” the chairman said uncertainly.
    

      “Thank you. All seven of us are ordinary thieves—naturally of
      different departments. The Association has authorised us to put before
      your esteemed Committee”—the gentleman again made an elegant
      bow—“our respectful demand for assistance.”
    

      “I don’t quite understand ... quite frankly ... what is the
      connection...” The chairman waved his hands helplessly. “However,
      please go on.”
    

      “The matter about which we have the courage and the honour to apply
      to you, gentlemen, is very clear, very simple, and very brief. It will
      take only six or seven minutes. I consider it my duty to warn you of this
      beforehand, in view of the late hour and the 115 degrees that Fahrenheit
      marks in the shade.” The orator expectorated slightly and glanced at
      his superb gold watch. “You see, in the reports that have lately
      appeared in the local papers of the melancholy and terrible days of the
      last pogrom, there have very often been indications that among the
      instigators of the pogrom who were paid and organised by the police—the
      dregs of society, consisting of drunkards, tramps, souteneurs, and
      hooligans from the slums—thieves were also to be found. At first we
      were silent, but finally we considered ourselves under the necessity of
      protesting against such an unjust and serious accusation, before the face
      of the whole of intellectual society. I know well that in the eye of the
      law we are offenders and enemies of society. But imagine only for a
      moment, gentlemen, the situation of this enemy of society when he is
      accused wholesale of an offence which he not only never committed, but
      which he is ready to resist with the whole strength of his soul. It goes
      without saying that he will feel the outrage of such an injustice more
      keenly than a normal, average, fortunate citizen. Now, we declare that the
      accusation brought against us is utterly devoid of all basis, not merely
      of fact but even of logic. I intend to prove this in a few words if the
      honourable committee will kindly listen.”
    

      “Proceed,” said the chairman.
    

      “Please do ... Please ...” was heard from the barristers, now
      animated.
    

      “I offer you my sincere thanks in the name of all my comrades.
      Believe me, you will never repent your attention to the representatives of
      our ... well, let us say, slippery, but nevertheless difficult,
      profession. ‘So we begin,’ as Giraldoni sings in the prologue
      to Pagliacci.
    

      “But first I would ask your permission, Mr. Chairman, to quench my
      thirst a little... Porter, bring me a lemonade and a glass of English
      bitter, there’s a good fellow. Gentlemen, I will not speak of the
      moral aspect of our profession nor of its social importance. Doubtless you
      know better than I the striking and brilliant paradox of Proudhon: La
      propriete c’est le vol—a paradox if you like, but one that
      has never yet been refuted by the sermons of cowardly bourgeois or fat
      priests. For instance: a father accumulates a million by energetic and
      clever exploitation, and leaves it to his son—a rickety, lazy,
      ignorant, degenerate idiot, a brainless maggot, a true parasite.
      Potentially a million rubles is a million working days, the absolutely
      irrational right to labour, sweat, life, and blood of a terrible number of
      men. Why? What is the ground of reason? Utterly unknown. Then why not
      agree with the proposition, gentlemen, that our profession is to some
      extent as it were a correction of the excessive accumulation of values in
      the hands of individuals, and serves as a protest against all the
      hardships, abominations, arbitrariness, violence, and negligence of the
      human personality, against all the monstrosities created by the bourgeois
      capitalistic organisation of modern society? Sooner or later, this order
      of things will assuredly be overturned by the social revolution. Property
      will pass away into the limbo of melancholy memories and with it, alas! we
      will disappear from the face of the earth, we, les braves chevaliers d’industrie.”
    

      The orator paused to take the tray from the hands of the porter, and
      placed it near to his hand on the table.
    

      “Excuse me, gentlemen... Here, my good man, take this,... and by the
      way, when you go out shut the door close behind you.”
    

      “Very good, your Excellency!” the porter bawled in jest.
    

      The orator drank off half a glass and continued: “However, let us
      leave aside the philosophical, social, and economic aspects of the
      question. I do not wish to fatigue your attention. I must nevertheless
      point out that our profession very closely approaches the idea of that
      which is called art. Into it enter all the elements which go to form art—vocation,
      inspiration, fantasy, inventiveness, ambition, and a long and arduous
      apprenticeship to the science. From it is absent virtue alone, concerning
      which the great Karamzin wrote with such stupendous and fiery fascination.
      Gentlemen, nothing is further from my intention than to trifle with you
      and waste your precious time with idle paradoxes; but I cannot avoid
      expounding my idea briefly. To an outsider’s ear it sounds absurdly
      wild and ridiculous to speak of the vocation of a thief. However, I
      venture to assure you that this vocation is a reality. There are men who
      possess a peculiarly strong visual memory, sharpness and accuracy of eye,
      presence of mind, dexterity of hand, and above all a subtle sense of
      touch, who are as it were born into God’s world for the sole and
      special purpose of becoming distinguished card-sharpers. The pickpockets’
      profession demands extraordinary nimbleness and agility, a terrific
      certainty of movement, not to mention a ready wit, a talent for
      observation and strained attention. Some have a positive vocation for
      breaking open safes: from their tenderest childhood they are attracted by
      the mysteries of every kind of complicated mechanism—bicycles,
      sewing machines, clock-work toys and watches. Finally, gentlemen, there
      are people with an hereditary animus against private property. You may
      call this phenomenon degeneracy. But I tell you that you cannot entice a
      true thief, and thief by vocation, into the prose of honest vegetation by
      any gingerbread reward, or by the offer of a secure position, or by the
      gift of money, or by a woman’s love: because there is here a
      permanent beauty of risk, a fascinating abyss of danger, the delightful
      sinking of the heart, the impetuous pulsation of life, the ecstasy! You
      are armed with the protection of the law, by locks, revolvers, telephones,
      police and soldiery; but we only by our own dexterity, cunning and
      fearlessness. We are the foxes, and society—is a chicken-run guarded
      by dogs. Are you aware that the most artistic and gifted natures in our
      villages become horse-thieves and poachers? What would you have? Life is
      so meagre, so insipid, so intolerably dull to eager and high-spirited
      souls!
    

      “I pass on to inspiration. Gentlemen, doubtless you have had to read
      of thefts that were supernatural in design and execution. In the headlines
      of the newspapers they are called ‘An Amazing Robbery,’ or 'An
      Ingenious Swindle,’ or again ‘A Clever Ruse of the Gangsters.’
      In such cases our bourgeois paterfamilias waves his hands and exclaims:
      'What a terrible thing! If only their abilities were turned to good—their
      inventiveness, their amazing knowledge of human psychology, their
      self-possession, their fearlessness, their incomparable histrionic powers!
      What extraordinary benefits they would bring to the country!’ But it
      is well known that the bourgeois paterfamilias was specially devised by
      Heaven to utter commonplaces and trivialities. I myself sometimes—we
      thieves are sentimental people, I confess—I myself sometimes admire
      a beautiful sunset in Aleksandra Park or by the sea-shore. And I am always
      certain beforehand that some one near me will say with infallible aplomb:
      'Look at it. If it were put into picture no one would ever believe it!’
      I turn round and naturally I see a self-satisfied, full-fed paterfamilias,
      who delights in repeating some one else’s silly statement as though
      it were his own. As for our dear country, the bourgeois paterfamilias
      looks upon it as though it were a roast turkey. If you’ve managed to
      cut the best part of the bird for yourself, eat it quietly in a
      comfortable corner and praise God. But he’s not really the important
      person. I was led away by my detestation of vulgarity and I apologise for
      the digression. The real point is that genius and inspiration, even when
      they are not devoted to the service of the Orthodox Church, remain rare
      and beautiful things. Progress is a law—and theft too has its
      creation.
    

      “Finally, our profession is by no means as easy and pleasant as it
      seems to the first glance. It demands long experience, constant practice,
      slow and painful apprenticeship. It comprises in itself hundreds of
      supple, skilful processes that the cleverest juggler cannot compass. That
      I may not give you only empty words, gentlemen, I will perform a few
      experiments before you now. I ask you to have every confidence in the
      demonstrators. We are all at present in the enjoyment of legal freedom,
      and though we are usually watched, and every one of us is known by face,
      and our photographs adorn the albums of all detective departments, for the
      time being we are not under the necessity of hiding ourselves from
      anybody. If any one of you should recognise any of us in the future under
      different circumstances, we ask you earnestly always to act in accordance
      with your professional duties and your obligations as citizens. In
      grateful return for your kind attention we have decided to declare your
      property inviolable, and to invest it with a thieves’ taboo.
      However, I proceed to business.”
    

      The orator turned round and gave an order: “Sesoi the Great, will
      you come this way!”
    

      An enormous fellow with a stoop, whose hands reached to his knees, without
      a forehead or a neck, like a big, fair Hercules, came forward. He grinned
      stupidly and rubbed his left eyebrow in his confusion.
    

      “Can’t do nothin’ here,” he said hoarsely.
    

      The gentleman in the sandy suit spoke for him, turning to the committee.
    

      “Gentlemen, before you stands a respected member of our association.
      His specialty is breaking open safes, iron strong boxes, and other
      receptacles for monetary tokens. In his night work he sometimes avails
      himself of the electric current of the lighting installation for fusing
      metals. Unfortunately he has nothing on which he can demonstrate the best
      items of his repertoire. He will open the most elaborate lock
      irreproachably... By the way, this door here, it’s locked, is it
      not?”
    

      Every one turned to look at the door, on which a printed notice hung:
      “Stage Door. Strictly Private.”
    

      “Yes, the door’s locked, evidently,” the chairman
      agreed.
    

      “Admirable. Sesoi the Great, will you be so kind?”
    

      “‘Tain’t nothin’ at all,” said the giant
      leisurely.
    

      He went close to the door, shook it cautiously with his hand, took out of
      his pocket a small bright instrument, bent down to the keyhole, made some
      almost imperceptible movements with the tool, suddenly straightened and
      flung the door wide in silence. The chairman had his watch in his hands.
      The whole affair took only ten seconds.
    

      “Thank you, Sesoi the Great,” said the gentleman in the sandy
      suit politely. “You may go back to your seat.”
    

      But the chairman interrupted in some alarm: “Excuse me. This is all
      very interesting and instructive, but ... is it included in your esteemed
      colleague’s profession to be able to lock the door again?”
    

      “Ah, mille pardons.” The gentleman bowed hurriedly.
      “It slipped my mind. Sesoi the Great, would you oblige?”
    

      The door was locked with the same adroitness and the same silence. The
      esteemed colleague waddled back to his friends, grinning.
    

      “Now I will have the honour to show you the skill of one of our
      comrades who is in the line of picking pockets in theatres and
      railway-stations,” continued the orator. “He is still very
      young, but you may to some extent judge from the delicacy of his present
      work of the heights he will attain by diligence. Yasha!” A swarthy
      youth in a blue silk blouse and long glacÃ© boots, like a gipsy, came
      forward with a swagger, fingering the tassels of his belt, and merrily
      screwing up his big, impudent black eyes with yellow whites.
    

      “Gentlemen,” said the gentleman in the sandy suit
      persuasively, “I must ask if one of you would be kind enough to
      submit himself to a little experiment. I assure you this will be an
      exhibition only, just a game.”
    

      He looked round over the seated company.
    

      The short plump Karaite, black as a beetle, came forward from his table.
    

      “At your service,” he said amusedly.
    

      “Yasha!” The orator signed with his head.
    

      Yasha came close to the solicitor. On his left arm, which was bent, hung a
      bright-coloured, figured scarf.
    

      “Suppose yer in church or at the bar in one of the halls,—or
      watchin’ a circus,” he began in a sugary, fluent voice.
      “I see straight off—there’s a toff... Excuse me, sir.
      Suppose you’re the toff. There’s no offence—just means a
      rich gent, decent enough, but don’t know his way about. First—what’s
      he likely to have about ‘im? All sorts. Mostly, a ticker and a
      chain. Whereabouts does he keep ‘em? Somewhere in his top vest
      pocket—here. Others have ‘em in the bottom pocket. Just here.
      Purse—most always in the trousers, except when a greeny keeps it in
      his jacket. Cigar-case. Have a look first what it is—gold, silver—with
      a monogram. Leather—what decent man’d soil his hands?
      Cigar-case. Seven pockets: here, here, here, up there, there, here and
      here again. That’s right, ain’t it? That’s how you go to
      work.”
    

      As he spoke the young man smiled. His eyes shone straight into the
      barrister’s. With a quick, dexterous movement of his right hand he
      pointed to various portions of his clothes.
    

      “Then again you might see a pin here in the tie. However we do not
      appropriate. Such gents nowadays—they hardly ever wear a real
      stone. Then I comes up to him. I begin straight off to talk to him like a
      gent: ‘Sir, would you be so kind as to give me a light from your
      cigarette’—or something of the sort. At any rate, I enter into
      conversation. What’s next? I look him straight in the peepers, just
      like this. Only two of me fingers are at it—just this and this.”
      Yasha lifted two fingers of his right hand on a level with the solicitor’s
      face, the forefinger and the middle finger and moved them about.
    

      “D’ you see? With these two fingers I run over the whole
      pianner. Nothin’ wonderful in it: one, two, three—ready. Any
      man who wasn’t stupid could learn easily. That’s all it is.
      Most ordinary business. I thank you.”
    

      The pickpocket swung on his heel as if to return to his seat.
    

      “Yasha!” The gentleman in the sandy suit said with meaning
      weight. “Yasha!” he repeated sternly.
    

      Yasha stopped. His back was turned to the barrister, but be evidently gave
      his representative an imploring look, because the latter frowned and shook
      his head.
    

      “Yasha!” he said for the third time, in a threatening tone.
    

      “Huh!” The young thief grunted in vexation and turned to face
      the solicitor. “Where’s your little watch, sir?” he said
      in a piping voice.
    

      “Oh!” the Karaite brought himself up sharp.
    

      “You see—now you say ‘Oh!’” Yasha continued
      reproachfully. “All the while you were admiring me right hand, I was
      operatin’ yer watch with my left. Just with these two little
      fingers, under the scarf. That’s why we carry a scarf. Since your
      chain’s not worth anything—a present from some mamselle
      and the watch is a gold one, I’ve left you the chain as a keepsake.
      Take it,” he added with a sigh, holding out the watch.
    

      “But ... That is clever,” the barrister said in confusion.
      “I didn’t notice it at all.”
    

      “That’s our business,” Yasha said with pride.
    

      He swaggered back to his comrades. Meantime the orator took a drink from
      his glass and continued.
    

      “Now, gentlemen, our next collaborator will give you an exhibition
      of some ordinary card tricks, which are worked at fairs, on steamboats and
      railways. With three cards, for instance, an ace, a queen, and a six, he
      can quite easily... But perhaps you are tired of these demonstrations,
      gentlemen.”...
    

      “Not at all. It’s extremely interesting,” the chairman
      answered affably. “I should like to ask one question—that is
      if it is not too indiscreet—what is your own specialty?”
    

      “Mine... H’m... No, how could it be an indiscretion?... I work
      the big diamond shops ... and my other business is banks,” answered
      the orator with a modest smile. “Don’t think this occupation
      is easier than others. Enough that I know four European languages, German,
      French, English, and Italian, not to mention Polish, Ukrainian and
      Yiddish. But shall I show you some more experiments, Mr. Chairman?”
    

      The chairman looked at his watch.
    

      “Unfortunately the time is too short,” he said. “Wouldn’t
      it be better to pass on to the substance of your business? Besides, the
      experiments we have just seen have amply convinced us of the talent of
      your esteemed associates... Am I not right, Isaac Abramovich?”
    

      “Yes, yes ... absolutely,” the Karaite barrister readily
      confirmed.
    

      “Admirable,” the gentleman in the sandy suit kindly agreed.
      “My dear Count”—he turned to a blond, curly-haired man,
      with a face like a billiard-maker on a bank-holiday—“put your
      instruments away. They will not be wanted. I have only a few words more to
      say, gentlemen. Now that you have convinced yourselves that our art,
      although it does not enjoy the patronage of high-placed individuals, is
      nevertheless an art; and you have probably come to my opinion that this
      art is one which demands many personal qualities besides constant labour,
      danger, and unpleasant misunderstandings—you will also, I hope,
      believe that it is possible to become attached to its practice and to love
      and esteem it, however strange that may appear at first sight. Picture to
      yourselves that a famous poet of talent, whose tales and poems adorn the
      pages of our best magazines, is suddenly offered the chance of writing
      verses at a penny a line, signed into the bargain, as an advertisement for
      ‘Cigarettes Jasmine’—or that a slander was spread about
      one of you distinguished barristers, accusing you of making a business of
      concocting evidence for divorce cases, or of writing petitions from the
      cabmen to the governor in public-houses! Certainly your relatives, friends
      and acquaintances wouldn’t believe it. But the rumour has already
      done its poisonous work, and you have to live through minutes of torture.
      Now picture to yourselves that such a disgraceful and vexatious slander,
      started by God knows whom, begins to threaten not only your good name and
      your quiet digestion, but your freedom, your health, and even your life!
    

      “This is the position of us thieves, now being slandered by the
      newspapers. I must explain. There is in existence a class of scum—passez-moi
      le mot—whom we call their ‘Mothers’ Darlings.’
      With these we are unfortunately confused. They have neither shame nor
      conscience, a dissipated riff-raff, mothers’ useless darlings, idle,
      clumsy drones, shop assistants who commit unskilful thefts. He thinks
      nothing of living on his mistress, a prostitute, like the male mackerel,
      who always swims after the female and lives on her excrements. He is
      capable of robbing a child with violence in a dark alley, in order to get
      a penny; he will kill a man in his sleep and torture an old woman. These
      men are the pests of our profession. For them the beauties and the
      traditions of the art have no existence. They watch us real, talented
      thieves like a pack of jackals after a lion. Suppose I’ve managed to
      bring off an important job—we won’t mention the fact that I
      have to leave two-thirds of what I get to the receivers who sell the goods
      and discount the notes, or the customary subsidies to our incorruptible
      police—I still have to share out something to each one of these
      parasites, who have got wind of my job, by accident, hearsay, or a casual
      glance.
    

      “So we call them Motients, which means ‘half,’ a
      corruption of moitiÃ© ... Original etymology. I pay him only because
      he knows and may inform against me. And it mostly happens that even when
      he’s got his share he runs off to the police in order to get another
      dollar. We, honest thieves... Yes, you may laugh, gentlemen, but I repeat
      it: we honest thieves detest these reptiles. We have another name for
      them, a stigma of ignominy; but I dare not utter it here out of respect
      for the place and for my audience. Oh, yes, they would gladly accept an
      invitation to a pogrom. The thought that we may be confused with them is a
      hundred times more insulting to us even than the accusation of taking part
      in a pogrom.
    

      “Gentlemen! While I have been speaking I have often noticed smiles
      on your faces. I understand you. Our presence here, our application for
      your assistance, and above all the unexpectedness of such a phenomenon as
      a systematic organisation of thieves, with delegates who are thieves, and
      a leader of the deputation, also a thief by profession—it is all so
      original that it must inevitably arouse a smile. But now I will speak from
      the depth of my heart. Let us be rid of our outward wrappings, gentlemen,
      let us speak as men to men.
    

      “Almost all of us are educated, and all love books. We don’t
      only read the adventures of Roqueambole, as the realistic writers say of
      us. Do you think our hearts did not bleed and our cheeks did not burn from
      shame, as though we had been slapped in the face, all the time that this
      unfortunate, disgraceful, accursed, cowardly war lasted. Do you really
      think that our souls do not flame with anger when our country is lashed
      with Cossack-whips, and trodden under foot, shot and spit at by mad,
      exasperated men? Will you not believe that we thieves meet every step
      towards the liberation to come with a thrill of ecstasy?
    

      “We understand, every one of us—perhaps only a little less
      than you barristers, gentlemen—the real sense of the pogroms. Every
      time that some dastardly event or some ignominious failure has occurred,
      after executing a martyr in a dark corner of a fortress, or after
      deceiving public confidence, some one who is hidden and unapproachable
      gets frightened of the people’s anger and diverts its vicious
      element upon the heads of innocent Jews. Whose diabolical mind invents
      these pogroms—these titanic blood-lettings, these cannibal
      amusements for the dark, bestial souls?
    

      “We all see with certain clearness that the last convulsions of the
      bureaucracy are at hand. Forgive me if I present it imaginatively. There
      was a people that had a chief temple, wherein dwelt a bloodthirsty deity,
      behind a curtain, guarded by priests. Once fearless hands tore the curtain
      away. Then all the people saw, instead of a god, a huge, shaggy, voracious
      spider, like a loathsome cuttlefish. They beat it and shoot at it: it is
      dismembered already; but still in the frenzy of its final agony it
      stretches over all the ancient temple its disgusting, clawing tentacles.
      And the priests, themselves under sentence of death, push into the monster’s
      grasp all whom they can seize in their terrified, trembling fingers.
    

      “Forgive me. What I have said is probably wild and incoherent. But I
      am somewhat agitated. Forgive me. I continue. We thieves by profession
      know better than any one else how these pogroms were organised. We wander
      everywhere: into public houses, markets, tea-shops, doss-houses, public
      places, the harbour. We can swear before God and man and posterity that we
      have seen how the police organise the massacres, without shame and almost
      without concealment. We know them all by face, in uniform or disguise.
      They invited many of us to take part; but there was none so vile among us
      as to give even the outward consent that fear might have extorted.
    

      “You know, of course, how the various strata of Russian society
      behave towards the police? It is not even respected by those who avail
      themselves of its dark services. But we despise and hate it three, ten
      times more—not because many of us have been tortured in the
      detective departments, which are just chambers of horror, beaten almost to
      death, beaten with whips of ox-hide and of rubber in order to extort a
      confession or to make us betray a comrade. Yes, we hate them for that too.
      But we thieves, all of us who have been in prison, have a mad passion for
      freedom. Therefore we despise our gaolers with all the hatred that a human
      heart can feel. I will speak for myself. I have been tortured three times
      by police detectives till I was half dead. My lungs and liver have been
      shattered. In the mornings I spit blood until I can breathe no more. But
      if I were told that I will be spared a fourth flogging only by shaking
      hands with a chief of the detective police, I would refuse to do it!
    

      “And then the newspapers say that we took from these hands
      Judas-money, dripping with human blood. No, gentlemen, it is a slander
      which stabs our very soul, and inflicts insufferable pain. Not money, nor
      threats, nor promises will suffice to make us mercenary murderers of our
      brethren, nor accomplices with them.”
    

      “Never ... No ... No ... ,” his comrades standing behind him
      began to murmur.
    

      “I will say more,” the thief continued. “Many of us
      protected the victims during this pogrom. Our friend, called Sesoi the
      Great—you have just seen him, gentlemen—was then lodging with
      a Jewish braid-maker on the Moldavanka. With a poker in his hands he
      defended his landlord from a great horde of assassins. It is true, Sesoi
      the Great is a man of enormous physical strength, and this is well known
      to many of the inhabitants of the Moldavanka. But you must agree,
      gentlemen, that in these moments Sesoi the Great looked straight into the
      face of death. Our comrade Martin the Miner—this gentleman here”
      —the orator pointed to a pale, bearded man with beautiful eyes who
      was holding himself in the background—“saved an old Jewess,
      whom he had never seen before, who was being pursued by a crowd of these
      canaille. They broke his head with a crowbar for his pains, smashed
      his arm in two places and splintered a rib. He is only just out of
      hospital. That is the way our most ardent and determined members acted.
      The others trembled for anger and wept for their own impotence.
    

      “None of us will forget the horrors of those bloody days and bloody
      nights lit up by the glare of fires, those sobbing women, those little
      children’s bodies torn to pieces and left lying in the street. But
      for all that not one of us thinks that the police and the mob are the real
      origin of the evil. These tiny, stupid, loathsome vermin are only a
      senseless fist that is governed by a vile, calculating mind, moved by a
      diabolical will.
    

      “Yes, gentlemen,” the orator continued, “we thieves have
      nevertheless merited your legal contempt. But when you, noble gentlemen,
      need the help of clever, brave, obedient men at the barricades, men who
      will be ready to meet death with a song and a jest on their lips for the
      most glorious word in the world—Freedom—will you cast us off
      then and order us away because of an inveterate revulsion? Damn it all,
      the first victim in the French Revolution was a prostitute. She jumped up
      on to a barricade, with her skirt caught elegantly up into her hand and
      called out: ‘Which of you soldiers will dare to shoot a woman?’
      Yes, by God.” The orator exclaimed aloud and brought down his fist
      on to the marble table top: “They killed her, but her action was
      magnificent, and the beauty of her words immortal.
    

      “If you should drive us away on the great day, we will turn to you
      and say: ‘You spotless Cherubim—if human thoughts had the
      power to wound, kill, and rob man of honour and property, then which of
      you innocent doves would not deserve the knout and imprisonment for life?’
      Then we will go away from you and build our own gay, sporting, desperate
      thieves’ barricade, and will die with such united songs on our lips
      that you will envy us, you who are whiter than snow!
    

      “But I have been once more carried away. Forgive me. I am at the
      end. You now see, gentlemen, what feelings the newspaper slanders have
      excited in us. Believe in our sincerity and do what you can to remove the
      filthy stain which has so unjustly been cast upon us. I have finished.”
    

      He went away from the table and joined his comrades. The barristers were
      whispering in an undertone, very much as the magistrates of the bench at
      sessions. Then the chairman rose.
    

      “We trust you absolutely, and we will make every effort to clear
      your association of this most grievous charge. At the same time my
      colleagues have authorised me, gentlemen, to convey to you their deep
      respect for your passionate feelings as citizens. And for my own part I
      ask the leader of the deputation for permission to shake him by the hand.”
    

      The two men, both tall and serious, held each other’s hands in a
      strong, masculine grip.
    

      The barristers were leaving the theatre; but four of them hung back a
      little beside the clothes rack in the hall. Isaac Abramovich could not
      find his new, smart grey hat anywhere. In its place on the wooden peg hung
      a cloth cap jauntily flattened in on either side.
    

      “Yasha!” The stern voice of the orator was suddenly heard from
      the other side of the door. “Yasha! It’s the last time I’ll
      speak to you, curse you! ... Do you hear?” The heavy door opened
      wide. The gentleman in the sandy suit entered. In his hands he held Isaac
      Abramovich’s hat; on his face was a well-bred smile.
    

      “Gentlemen, for Heaven’s sake forgive us—an odd little
      misunderstanding. One of our comrades exchanged his hat by accident... Oh,
      it is yours! A thousand pardons. Doorkeeper! Why don’t you keep an
      eye on things, my good fellow, eh? Just give me that cap, there. Once
      more, I ask you to forgive me, gentlemen.”
    

      With a pleasant bow and the same well-bred smile he made his way quickly
      into the street.
    





      The Duel and Other Stories
    








      THE DUEL
    

      I
    

It was eight o’clock
      in the morning—the time when the officers, the local officials, and
      the visitors usually took their morning dip in the sea after the hot,
      stifling night, and then went into the pavilion to drink tea or coffee.
      Ivan Andreitch Laevsky, a thin, fair young man of twenty-eight, wearing
      the cap of a clerk in the Ministry of Finance and with slippers on his
      feet, coming down to bathe, found a number of acquaintances on the beach,
      and among them his friend Samoylenko, the army doctor.
    

      With his big cropped head, short neck, his red face, his big nose, his
      shaggy black eyebrows and grey whiskers, his stout puffy figure and his
      hoarse military bass, this Samoylenko made on every newcomer the
      unpleasant impression of a gruff bully; but two or three days after making
      his acquaintance, one began to think his face extraordinarily
      good-natured, kind, and even handsome. In spite of his clumsiness and
      rough manner, he was a peaceable man, of infinite kindliness and goodness
      of heart, always ready to be of use. He was on familiar terms with every
      one in the town, lent every one money, doctored every one, made matches,
      patched up quarrels, arranged picnics at which he cooked shashlik
      and an awfully good soup of grey mullets. He was always looking after
      other people’s affairs and trying to interest some one on their
      behalf, and was always delighted about something. The general opinion
      about him was that he was without faults of character. He had only two
      weaknesses: he was ashamed of his own good nature, and tried to disguise
      it by a surly expression and an assumed gruffness; and he liked his
      assistants and his soldiers to call him “Your Excellency,”
      although he was only a civil councillor.
    

      “Answer one question for me, Alexandr Daviditch,” Laevsky
      began, when both he and Samoylenko were in the water up to their
      shoulders. “Suppose you had loved a woman and had been living with
      her for two or three years, and then left off caring for her, as one does,
      and began to feel that you had nothing in common with her. How would you
      behave in that case?”
    

      “It’s very simple. ‘You go where you please, madam’—and
      that would be the end of it.”
    

      “It’s easy to say that! But if she has nowhere to go? A woman
      with no friends or relations, without a farthing, who can’t work . .
      .”
    

      “Well? Five hundred roubles down or an allowance of twenty-five
      roubles a month—and nothing more. It’s very simple.”
    

      “Even supposing you have five hundred roubles and can pay
      twenty-five roubles a month, the woman I am speaking of is an educated
      woman and proud. Could you really bring yourself to offer her money? And
      how would you do it?”
    

      Samoylenko was going to answer, but at that moment a big wave covered them
      both, then broke on the beach and rolled back noisily over the shingle.
      The friends got out and began dressing.
    

      “Of course, it is difficult to live with a woman if you don’t
      love her,” said Samoylenko, shaking the sand out of his boots.
      “But one must look at the thing humanely, Vanya. If it were my case,
      I should never show a sign that I did not love her, and I should go on
      living with her till I died.”
    

      He was at once ashamed of his own words; he pulled himself up and said:
    

      “But for aught I care, there might be no females at all. Let them
      all go to the devil!”
    

      The friends dressed and went into the pavilion. There Samoylenko was quite
      at home, and even had a special cup and saucer. Every morning they brought
      him on a tray a cup of coffee, a tall cut glass of iced water, and a tiny
      glass of brandy. He would first drink the brandy, then the hot coffee,
      then the iced water, and this must have been very nice, for after drinking
      it his eyes looked moist with pleasure, he would stroke his whiskers with
      both hands, and say, looking at the sea:
    

      “A wonderfully magnificent view!”
    

      After a long night spent in cheerless, unprofitable thoughts which
      prevented him from sleeping, and seemed to intensify the darkness and
      sultriness of the night, Laevsky felt listless and shattered. He felt no
      better for the bathe and the coffee.
    

      “Let us go on with our talk, Alexandr Daviditch,” he said.
      “I won’t make a secret of it; I’ll speak to you openly
      as to a friend. Things are in a bad way with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and me .
      . . a very bad way! Forgive me for forcing my private affairs upon you,
      but I must speak out.”
    

      Samoylenko, who had a misgiving of what he was going to speak about,
      dropped his eyes and drummed with his fingers on the table.
    

      “I’ve lived with her for two years and have ceased to love
      her,” Laevsky went on; “or, rather, I realised that I never
      had felt any love for her. . . . These two years have been a mistake.”
    

      It was Laevsky’s habit as he talked to gaze attentively at the pink
      palms of his hands, to bite his nails, or to pinch his cuffs. And he did
      so now.
    

      “I know very well you can’t help me,” he said. “But
      I tell you, because unsuccessful and superfluous people like me find their
      salvation in talking. I have to generalise about everything I do. I’m
      bound to look for an explanation and justification of my absurd existence
      in somebody else’s theories, in literary types—in the idea
      that we, upper-class Russians, are degenerating, for instance, and so on.
      Last night, for example, I comforted myself by thinking all the time:
      ‘Ah, how true Tolstoy is, how mercilessly true!’ And that did
      me good. Yes, really, brother, he is a great writer, say what you like!”
    

      Samoylenko, who had never read Tolstoy and was intending to do so every
      day of his life, was a little embarrassed, and said:
    

      “Yes, all other authors write from imagination, but he writes
      straight from nature.”
    

      “My God!” sighed Laevsky; “how distorted we all are by
      civilisation! I fell in love with a married woman and she with me. . . .
      To begin with, we had kisses, and calm evenings, and vows, and Spencer,
      and ideals, and interests in common. . . . What a deception! We really ran
      away from her husband, but we lied to ourselves and made out that we ran
      away from the emptiness of the life of the educated class. We pictured our
      future like this: to begin with, in the Caucasus, while we were getting to
      know the people and the place, I would put on the Government uniform and
      enter the service; then at our leisure we would pick out a plot of ground,
      would toil in the sweat of our brow, would have a vineyard and a field,
      and so on. If you were in my place, or that zoologist of yours, Von Koren,
      you might live with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna for thirty years, perhaps, and
      might leave your heirs a rich vineyard and three thousand acres of maize;
      but I felt like a bankrupt from the first day. In the town you have
      insufferable heat, boredom, and no society; if you go out into the
      country, you fancy poisonous spiders, scorpions, or snakes lurking under
      every stone and behind every bush, and beyond the fields—mountains
      and the desert. Alien people, an alien country, a wretched form of
      civilisation—all that is not so easy, brother, as walking on the
      Nevsky Prospect in one’s fur coat, arm-in-arm with Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, dreaming of the sunny South. What is needed here is a life and
      death struggle, and I’m not a fighting man. A wretched neurasthenic,
      an idle gentleman . . . . From the first day I knew that my dreams of a
      life of labour and of a vineyard were worthless. As for love, I ought to
      tell you that living with a woman who has read Spencer and has followed
      you to the ends of the earth is no more interesting than living with any
      Anfissa or Akulina. There’s the same smell of ironing, of powder,
      and of medicines, the same curl-papers every morning, the same
      self-deception.”
    

      “You can’t get on in the house without an iron,” said
      Samoylenko, blushing at Laevsky’s speaking to him so openly of a
      lady he knew. “You are out of humour to-day, Vanya, I notice.
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna is a splendid woman, highly educated, and you are a
      man of the highest intellect. Of course, you are not married,”
      Samoylenko went on, glancing round at the adjacent tables, “but that’s
      not your fault; and besides . . . one ought to be above conventional
      prejudices and rise to the level of modern ideas. I believe in free love
      myself, yes. . . . But to my thinking, once you have settled together, you
      ought to go on living together all your life.”
    

      “Without love?”
    

      “I will tell you directly,” said Samoylenko. “Eight
      years ago there was an old fellow, an agent, here—a man of very
      great intelligence. Well, he used to say that the great thing in married
      life was patience. Do you hear, Vanya? Not love, but patience. Love cannot
      last long. You have lived two years in love, and now evidently your
      married life has reached the period when, in order to preserve
      equilibrium, so to speak, you ought to exercise all your patience. . . .”
    

      “You believe in your old agent; to me his words are meaningless.
      Your old man could be a hypocrite; he could exercise himself in the virtue
      of patience, and, as he did so, look upon a person he did not love as an
      object indispensable for his moral exercises; but I have not yet fallen so
      low. If I want to exercise myself in patience, I will buy dumb-bells or a
      frisky horse, but I’ll leave human beings alone.”
    

      Samoylenko asked for some white wine with ice. When they had drunk a glass
      each, Laevsky suddenly asked:
    

      “Tell me, please, what is the meaning of softening of the brain?”
    

      “How can I explain it to you? . . . It’s a disease in which
      the brain becomes softer . . . as it were, dissolves.”
    

      “Is it curable?”
    

      “Yes, if the disease is not neglected. Cold douches, blisters. . . .
      Something internal, too.”
    

      “Oh! . . . Well, you see my position; I can’t live with her:
      it is more than I can do. While I’m with you I can be philosophical
      about it and smile, but at home I lose heart completely; I am so utterly
      miserable, that if I were told, for instance, that I should have to live
      another month with her, I should blow out my brains. At the same time,
      parting with her is out of the question. She has no friends or relations;
      she cannot work, and neither she nor I have any money. . . . What could
      become of her? To whom could she go? There is nothing one can think of. .
      . . Come, tell me, what am I to do?”
    

      “H’m! . . .” growled Samoylenko, not knowing what to
      answer. “Does she love you?”
    

      “Yes, she loves me in so far as at her age and with her temperament
      she wants a man. It would be as difficult for her to do without me as to
      do without her powder or her curl-papers. I am for her an indispensable,
      integral part of her boudoir.”
    

      Samoylenko was embarrassed.
    

      “You are out of humour to-day, Vanya,” he said. “You
      must have had a bad night.”
    

      “Yes, I slept badly. . . . Altogether, I feel horribly out of sorts,
      brother. My head feels empty; there’s a sinking at my heart, a
      weakness. . . . I must run away.”
    

      “Run where?”
    

      “There, to the North. To the pines and the mushrooms, to people and
      ideas. . . . I’d give half my life to bathe now in some little
      stream in the province of Moscow or Tula; to feel chilly, you know, and
      then to stroll for three hours even with the feeblest student, and to talk
      and talk endlessly. . . . And the scent of the hay! Do you remember it?
      And in the evening, when one walks in the garden, sounds of the piano
      float from the house; one hears the train passing. . . .”
    

      Laevsky laughed with pleasure; tears came into his eyes, and to cover
      them, without getting up, he stretched across the next table for the
      matches.
    

      “I have not been in Russia for eighteen years,” said
      Samoylenko. “I’ve forgotten what it is like. To my mind, there
      is not a country more splendid than the Caucasus.”
    

      “Vereshtchagin has a picture in which some men condemned to death
      are languishing at the bottom of a very deep well. Your magnificent
      Caucasus strikes me as just like that well. If I were offered the choice
      of a chimney-sweep in Petersburg or a prince in the Caucasus, I should
      choose the job of chimney-sweep.”
    

      Laevsky grew pensive. Looking at his stooping figure, at his eyes fixed
      dreamily at one spot, at his pale, perspiring face and sunken temples, at
      his bitten nails, at the slipper which had dropped off his heel,
      displaying a badly darned sock, Samoylenko was moved to pity, and probably
      because Laevsky reminded him of a helpless child, he asked:
    

      “Is your mother living?”
    

      “Yes, but we are on bad terms. She could not forgive me for this
      affair.”
    

      Samoylenko was fond of his friend. He looked upon Laevsky as a
      good-natured fellow, a student, a man with no nonsense about him, with
      whom one could drink, and laugh, and talk without reserve. What he
      understood in him he disliked extremely. Laevsky drank a great deal and at
      unsuitable times; he played cards, despised his work, lived beyond his
      means, frequently made use of unseemly expressions in conversation, walked
      about the streets in his slippers, and quarrelled with Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna before other people—and Samoylenko did not like this. But
      the fact that Laevsky had once been a student in the Faculty of Arts,
      subscribed to two fat reviews, often talked so cleverly that only a few
      people understood him, was living with a well-educated woman—all
      this Samoylenko did not understand, and he liked this and respected
      Laevsky, thinking him superior to himself.
    

      “There is another point,” said Laevsky, shaking his head.
      “Only it is between ourselves. I’m concealing it from
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna for the time. . . . Don’t let it out before
      her. . . . I got a letter the day before yesterday, telling me that her
      husband has died from softening of the brain.”
    

      “The Kingdom of Heaven be his!” sighed Samoylenko. “Why
      are you concealing it from her?”
    

      “To show her that letter would be equivalent to ‘Come to
      church to be married.’ And we should first have to make our
      relations clear. When she understands that we can’t go on living
      together, I will show her the letter. Then there will be no danger in it.”
    

      “Do you know what, Vanya,” said Samoylenko, and a sad and
      imploring expression came into his face, as though he were going to ask
      him about something very touching and were afraid of being refused.
      “Marry her, my dear boy!”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “Do your duty to that splendid woman! Her husband is dead, and so
      Providence itself shows you what to do!”
    

      “But do understand, you queer fellow, that it is impossible. To
      marry without love is as base and unworthy of a man as to perform mass
      without believing in it.”
    

      “But it’s your duty to.”
    

      “Why is it my duty?” Laevsky asked irritably.
    

      “Because you took her away from her husband and made yourself
      responsible for her.”
    

      “But now I tell you in plain Russian, I don’t love her!”
    

      “Well, if you’ve no love, show her proper respect, consider
      her wishes. . . .”
    

      “‘Show her respect, consider her wishes,’” Laevsky
      mimicked him. “As though she were some Mother Superior! . . . You
      are a poor psychologist and physiologist if you think that living with a
      woman one can get off with nothing but respect and consideration. What a
      woman thinks most of is her bedroom.”
    

      “Vanya, Vanya!” said Samoylenko, overcome with confusion.
    

      “You are an elderly child, a theorist, while I am an old man in
      spite of my years, and practical, and we shall never understand one
      another. We had better drop this conversation. Mustapha!” Laevsky
      shouted to the waiter. “What’s our bill?”
    

      “No, no . . .” the doctor cried in dismay, clutching Laevsky’s
      arm. “It is for me to pay. I ordered it. Make it out to me,”
      he cried to Mustapha.
    

      The friends got up and walked in silence along the sea-front. When they
      reached the boulevard, they stopped and shook hands at parting.
    

      “You are awfully spoilt, my friend!” Samoylenko sighed.
      “Fate has sent you a young, beautiful, cultured woman, and you
      refuse the gift, while if God were to give me a crooked old woman, how
      pleased I should be if only she were kind and affectionate! I would live
      with her in my vineyard and . . .”
    

      Samoylenko caught himself up and said:
    

      “And she might get the samovar ready for me there, the old hag.”
    

      After parting with Laevsky he walked along the boulevard. When, bulky and
      majestic, with a stern expression on his face, he walked along the
      boulevard in his snow-white tunic and superbly polished boots, squaring
      his chest, decorated with the Vladimir cross on a ribbon, he was very much
      pleased with himself, and it seemed as though the whole world were looking
      at him with pleasure. Without turning his head, he looked to each side and
      thought that the boulevard was extremely well laid out; that the young
      cypress-trees, the eucalyptuses, and the ugly, anemic palm-trees were very
      handsome and would in time give abundant shade; that the Circassians were
      an honest and hospitable people.
    

      “It’s strange that Laevsky does not like the Caucasus,”
      he thought, “very strange.”
    

      Five soldiers, carrying rifles, met him and saluted him. On the right side
      of the boulevard the wife of a local official was walking along the
      pavement with her son, a schoolboy.
    

      “Good-morning, Marya Konstantinovna,” Samoylenko shouted to
      her with a pleasant smile. “Have you been to bathe? Ha, ha, ha! . .
      . My respects to Nikodim Alexandritch!”
    

      And he went on, still smiling pleasantly, but seeing an assistant of the
      military hospital coming towards him, he suddenly frowned, stopped him,
      and asked:
    

      “Is there any one in the hospital?”
    

      “No one, Your Excellency.”
    

      “Eh?”
    

      “No one, Your Excellency.”
    

      “Very well, run along. . . .”
    

      Swaying majestically, he made for the lemonade stall, where sat a
      full-bosomed old Jewess, who gave herself out to be a Georgian, and said
      to her as loudly as though he were giving the word of command to a
      regiment:
    

      “Be so good as to give me some soda-water!”
    

      II
    

      Laevsky’s not loving Nadyezhda Fyodorovna showed itself chiefly in
      the fact that everything she said or did seemed to him a lie, or
      equivalent to a lie, and everything he read against women and love seemed
      to him to apply perfectly to himself, to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and her
      husband. When he returned home, she was sitting at the window, dressed and
      with her hair done, and with a preoccupied face was drinking coffee and
      turning over the leaves of a fat magazine; and he thought the drinking of
      coffee was not such a remarkable event that she need put on a preoccupied
      expression over it, and that she had been wasting her time doing her hair
      in a fashionable style, as there was no one here to attract and no need to
      be attractive. And in the magazine he saw nothing but falsity. He thought
      she had dressed and done her hair so as to look handsomer, and was reading
      in order to seem clever.
    

      “Will it be all right for me to go to bathe to-day?” she said.
    

      “Why? There won’t be an earthquake whether you go or not, I
      suppose . . . .”
    

      “No, I only ask in case the doctor should be vexed.”
    

      “Well, ask the doctor, then; I’m not a doctor.”
    

      On this occasion what displeased Laevsky most in Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was
      her white open neck and the little curls at the back of her head. And he
      remembered that when Anna Karenin got tired of her husband, what she
      disliked most of all was his ears, and thought: “How true it is, how
      true!”
    

      Feeling weak and as though his head were perfectly empty, he went into his
      study, lay down on his sofa, and covered his face with a handkerchief that
      he might not be bothered by the flies. Despondent and oppressive thoughts
      always about the same thing trailed slowly across his brain like a long
      string of waggons on a gloomy autumn evening, and he sank into a state of
      drowsy oppression. It seemed to him that he had wronged Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna and her husband, and that it was through his fault that her
      husband had died. It seemed to him that he had sinned against his own
      life, which he had ruined, against the world of lofty ideas, of learning,
      and of work, and he conceived that wonderful world as real and possible,
      not on this sea-front with hungry Turks and lazy mountaineers sauntering
      upon it, but there in the North, where there were operas, theatres,
      newspapers, and all kinds of intellectual activity. One could only there—not
      here—be honest, intelligent, lofty, and pure. He accused himself of
      having no ideal, no guiding principle in life, though he had a dim
      understanding now what it meant. Two years before, when he fell in love
      with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, it seemed to him that he had only to go with
      her as his wife to the Caucasus, and he would be saved from vulgarity and
      emptiness; in the same way now, he was convinced that he had only to part
      from Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and to go to Petersburg, and he would get
      everything he wanted.
    

      “Run away,” he muttered to himself, sitting up and biting his
      nails. “Run away!”
    

      He pictured in his imagination how he would go aboard the steamer and then
      would have some lunch, would drink some cold beer, would talk on deck with
      ladies, then would get into the train at Sevastopol and set off. Hurrah
      for freedom! One station after another would flash by, the air would keep
      growing colder and keener, then the birches and the fir-trees, then Kursk,
      Moscow. . . . In the restaurants cabbage soup, mutton with kasha,
      sturgeon, beer, no more Asiaticism, but Russia, real Russia. The
      passengers in the train would talk about trade, new singers, the
      Franco-Russian entente; on all sides there would be the feeling of
      keen, cultured, intellectual, eager life. . . . Hasten on, on! At last
      Nevsky Prospect, and Great Morskaya Street, and then Kovensky Place, where
      he used to live at one time when he was a student, the dear grey sky, the
      drizzling rain, the drenched cabmen. . . .
    

      “Ivan Andreitch!” some one called from the next room. “Are
      you at home?”
    

      “I’m here,” Laevsky responded. “What do you want?”
    

      “Papers.”
    

      Laevsky got up languidly, feeling giddy, walked into the other room,
      yawning and shuffling with his slippers. There, at the open window that
      looked into the street, stood one of his young fellow-clerks, laying out
      some government documents on the window-sill.
    

      “One minute, my dear fellow,” Laevsky said softly, and he went
      to look for the ink; returning to the window, he signed the papers without
      looking at them, and said: “It’s hot!”
    

      “Yes. Are you coming to-day?”
    

      “I don’t think so. . . . I’m not quite well. Tell
      Sheshkovsky that I will come and see him after dinner.”
    

      The clerk went away. Laevsky lay down on his sofa again and began
      thinking:
    

      “And so I must weigh all the circumstances and reflect on them.
      Before I go away from here I ought to pay up my debts. I owe about two
      thousand roubles. I have no money. . . . Of course, that’s not
      important; I shall pay part now, somehow, and I shall send the rest,
      later, from Petersburg. The chief point is Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. . . .
      First of all we must define our relations. . . . Yes.”
    

      A little later he was considering whether it would not be better to go to
      Samoylenko for advice.
    

      “I might go,” he thought, “but what use would there be
      in it? I shall only say something inappropriate about boudoirs, about
      women, about what is honest or dishonest. What’s the use of talking
      about what is honest or dishonest, if I must make haste to save my life,
      if I am suffocating in this cursed slavery and am killing myself? . . .
      One must realise at last that to go on leading the life I do is something
      so base and so cruel that everything else seems petty and trivial beside
      it. To run away,” he muttered, sitting down, “to run away.”
    

      The deserted seashore, the insatiable heat, and the monotony of the smoky
      lilac mountains, ever the same and silent, everlastingly solitary,
      overwhelmed him with depression, and, as it were, made him drowsy and
      sapped his energy. He was perhaps very clever, talented, remarkably
      honest; perhaps if the sea and the mountains had not closed him in on all
      sides, he might have become an excellent Zemstvo leader, a statesman, an
      orator, a political writer, a saint. Who knows? If so, was it not stupid
      to argue whether it were honest or dishonest when a gifted and useful man—an
      artist or musician, for instance—to escape from prison, breaks a
      wall and deceives his jailers? Anything is honest when a man is in such a
      position.
    

      At two o’clock Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna sat down to dinner.
      When the cook gave them rice and tomato soup, Laevsky said:
    

      “The same thing every day. Why not have cabbage soup?”
    

      “There are no cabbages.”
    

      “It’s strange. Samoylenko has cabbage soup and Marya
      Konstantinovna has cabbage soup, and only I am obliged to eat this mawkish
      mess. We can’t go on like this, darling.”
    

      As is common with the vast majority of husbands and wives, not a single
      dinner had in earlier days passed without scenes and fault-finding between
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and Laevsky; but ever since Laevsky had made up his
      mind that he did not love her, he had tried to give way to Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna in everything, spoke to her gently and politely, smiled, and
      called her “darling.”
    

      “This soup tastes like liquorice,” he said, smiling; he made
      an effort to control himself and seem amiable, but could not refrain from
      saying: “Nobody looks after the housekeeping. . . . If you are too
      ill or busy with reading, let me look after the cooking.”
    

      In earlier days she would have said to him, “Do by all means,”
      or, “I see you want to turn me into a cook”; but now she only
      looked at him timidly and flushed crimson.
    

      “Well, how do you feel to-day?” he asked kindly.
    

      “I am all right to-day. There is nothing but a little weakness.”
    

      “You must take care of yourself, darling. I am awfully anxious about
      you.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was ill in some way. Samoylenko said she had
      intermittent fever, and gave her quinine; the other doctor, Ustimovitch, a
      tall, lean, unsociable man, who used to sit at home in the daytime, and in
      the evenings walk slowly up and down on the sea-front coughing, with his
      hands folded behind him and a cane stretched along his back, was of
      opinion that she had a female complaint, and prescribed warm compresses.
      In old days, when Laevsky loved her, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s illness
      had excited his pity and terror; now he saw falsity even in her illness.
      Her yellow, sleepy face, her lustreless eyes, her apathetic expression,
      and the yawning that always followed her attacks of fever, and the fact
      that during them she lay under a shawl and looked more like a boy than a
      woman, and that it was close and stuffy in her room—all this, in his
      opinion, destroyed the illusion and was an argument against love and
      marriage.
    

      The next dish given him was spinach with hard-boiled eggs, while Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, as an invalid, had jelly and milk. When with a preoccupied
      face she touched the jelly with a spoon and then began languidly eating
      it, sipping milk, and he heard her swallowing, he was possessed by such an
      overwhelming aversion that it made his head tingle. He recognised that
      such a feeling would be an insult even to a dog, but he was angry, not
      with himself but with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, for arousing such a feeling,
      and he understood why lovers sometimes murder their mistresses. He would
      not murder her, of course, but if he had been on a jury now, he would have
      acquitted the murderer.
    

      “Merci, darling,” he said after dinner, and kissed Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna on the forehead.
    

      Going back into his study, he spent five minutes in walking to and fro,
      looking at his boots; then he sat down on his sofa and muttered:
    

      “Run away, run away! We must define the position and run away!”
    

      He lay down on the sofa and recalled again that Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s
      husband had died, perhaps, by his fault.
    

      “To blame a man for loving a woman, or ceasing to love a woman, is
      stupid,” he persuaded himself, lying down and raising his legs in
      order to put on his high boots. “Love and hatred are not under our
      control. As for her husband, maybe I was in an indirect way one of the
      causes of his death; but again, is it my fault that I fell in love with
      his wife and she with me?”
    

      Then he got up, and finding his cap, set off to the lodgings of his
      colleague, Sheshkovsky, where the Government clerks met every day to play
      vint and drink beer.
    

      “My indecision reminds me of Hamlet,” thought Laevsky on the
      way. “How truly Shakespeare describes it! Ah, how truly!”
    

      III
    

      For the sake of sociability and from sympathy for the hard plight of
      newcomers without families, who, as there was not an hotel in the town,
      had nowhere to dine, Dr. Samoylenko kept a sort of table d’hÃ´te. At
      this time there were only two men who habitually dined with him: a young
      zoologist called Von Koren, who had come for the summer to the Black Sea
      to study the embryology of the medusa, and a deacon called Pobyedov, who
      had only just left the seminary and been sent to the town to take the duty
      of the old deacon who had gone away for a cure. Each of them paid twelve
      roubles a month for their dinner and supper, and Samoylenko made them
      promise to turn up at two o’clock punctually.
    

      Von Koren was usually the first to appear. He sat down in the drawing-room
      in silence, and taking an album from the table, began attentively
      scrutinising the faded photographs of unknown men in full trousers and
      top-hats, and ladies in crinolines and caps. Samoylenko only remembered a
      few of them by name, and of those whom he had forgotten he said with a
      sigh: “A very fine fellow, remarkably intelligent!” When he
      had finished with the album, Von Koren took a pistol from the whatnot, and
      screwing up his left eye, took deliberate aim at the portrait of Prince
      Vorontsov, or stood still at the looking-glass and gazed a long time at
      his swarthy face, his big forehead, and his black hair, which curled like
      a negro’s, and his shirt of dull-coloured cotton with big flowers on
      it like a Persian rug, and the broad leather belt he wore instead of a
      waistcoat. The contemplation of his own image seemed to afford him almost
      more satisfaction than looking at photographs or playing with the pistols.
      He was very well satisfied with his face, and his becomingly clipped
      beard, and the broad shoulders, which were unmistakable evidence of his
      excellent health and physical strength. He was satisfied, too, with his
      stylish get-up, from the cravat, which matched the colour of his shirt,
      down to his brown boots.
    

      While he was looking at the album and standing before the glass, at that
      moment, in the kitchen and in the passage near, Samoylenko, without his
      coat and waistcoat, with his neck bare, excited and bathed in
      perspiration, was bustling about the tables, mixing the salad, or making
      some sauce, or preparing meat, cucumbers, and onion for the cold soup,
      while he glared fiercely at the orderly who was helping him, and
      brandished first a knife and then a spoon at him.
    

      “Give me the vinegar!” he said. “That’s not the
      vinegar—it’s the salad oil!” he shouted, stamping.
      “Where are you off to, you brute?”
    

      “To get the butter, Your Excellency,” answered the flustered
      orderly in a cracked voice.
    

      “Make haste; it’s in the cupboard! And tell Daria to put some
      fennel in the jar with the cucumbers! Fennel! Cover the cream up, gaping
      laggard, or the flies will get into it!”
    

      And the whole house seemed resounding with his shouts. When it was ten or
      fifteen minutes to two the deacon would come in; he was a lanky young man
      of twenty-two, with long hair, with no beard and a hardly perceptible
      moustache. Going into the drawing-room, he crossed himself before the
      ikon, smiled, and held out his hand to Von Koren.
    

      “Good-morning,” the zoologist said coldly. “Where have
      you been?”
    

      “I’ve been catching sea-gudgeon in the harbour.”
    

      “Oh, of course. . . . Evidently, deacon, you will never be busy with
      work.”
    

      “Why not? Work is not like a bear; it doesn’t run off into the
      woods,” said the deacon, smiling and thrusting his hands into the
      very deep pockets of his white cassock.
    

      “There’s no one to whip you!” sighed the zoologist.
    

      Another fifteen or twenty minutes passed and they were not called to
      dinner, and they could still hear the orderly running into the kitchen and
      back again, noisily treading with his boots, and Samoylenko shouting:
    

      “Put it on the table! Where are your wits? Wash it first.”
    

      The famished deacon and Von Koren began tapping on the floor with their
      heels, expressing in this way their impatience like the audience at a
      theatre. At last the door opened and the harassed orderly announced that
      dinner was ready! In the dining-room they were met by Samoylenko, crimson
      in the face, wrathful, perspiring from the heat of the kitchen; he looked
      at them furiously, and with an expression of horror, took the lid off the
      soup tureen and helped each of them to a plateful; and only when he was
      convinced that they were eating it with relish and liked it, he gave a
      sigh of relief and settled himself in his deep arm-chair. His face looked
      blissful and his eyes grew moist. . . . He deliberately poured himself out
      a glass of vodka and said:
    

      “To the health of the younger generation.”
    

      After his conversation with Laevsky, from early morning till dinner
      Samoylenko had been conscious of a load at his heart, although he was in
      the best of humours; he felt sorry for Laevsky and wanted to help him.
      After drinking a glass of vodka before the soup, he heaved a sigh and
      said:
    

      “I saw Vanya Laevsky to-day. He is having a hard time of it, poor
      fellow! The material side of life is not encouraging for him, and the
      worst of it is all this psychology is too much for him. I’m sorry
      for the lad.”
    

      “Well, that is a person I am not sorry for,” said Von Koren.
      “If that charming individual were drowning, I would push him under
      with a stick and say, ‘Drown, brother, drown away.’ . . .”
    

      “That’s untrue. You wouldn’t do it.”
    

      “Why do you think that?” The zoologist shrugged his shoulders.
      “I’m just as capable of a good action as you are.”
    

      “Is drowning a man a good action?” asked the deacon, and he
      laughed.
    

      “Laevsky? Yes.”
    

      “I think there is something amiss with the soup . . .” said
      Samoylenko, anxious to change the conversation.
    

      “Laevsky is absolutely pernicious and is as dangerous to society as
      the cholera microbe,” Von Koren went on. “To drown him would
      be a service.”
    

      “It does not do you credit to talk like that about your neighbour.
      Tell us: what do you hate him for?”
    

      “Don’t talk nonsense, doctor. To hate and despise a microbe is
      stupid, but to look upon everybody one meets without distinction as one’s
      neighbour, whatever happens—thanks very much, that is equivalent to
      giving up criticism, renouncing a straightforward attitude to people,
      washing one’s hands of responsibility, in fact! I consider your
      Laevsky a blackguard; I do not conceal it, and I am perfectly
      conscientious in treating him as such. Well, you look upon him as your
      neighbour—and you may kiss him if you like: you look upon him as
      your neighbour, and that means that your attitude to him is the same as to
      me and to the deacon; that is no attitude at all. You are equally
      indifferent to all.”
    

      “To call a man a blackguard!” muttered Samoylenko, frowning
      with distaste—“that is so wrong that I can’t find words
      for it!”
    

      “People are judged by their actions,” Von Koren continued.
      “Now you decide, deacon. . . . I am going to talk to you, deacon.
      Mr. Laevsky’s career lies open before you, like a long Chinese
      puzzle, and you can read it from beginning to end. What has he been doing
      these two years that he has been living here? We will reckon his doings on
      our fingers. First, he has taught the inhabitants of the town to play vint:
      two years ago that game was unknown here; now they all play it from
      morning till late at night, even the women and the boys. Secondly, he has
      taught the residents to drink beer, which was not known here either; the
      inhabitants are indebted to him for the knowledge of various sorts of
      spirits, so that now they can distinguish Kospelov’s vodka from
      Smirnov’s No. 21, blindfold. Thirdly, in former days, people here
      made love to other men’s wives in secret, from the same motives as
      thieves steal in secret and not openly; adultery was considered something
      they were ashamed to make a public display of. Laevsky has come as a
      pioneer in that line; he lives with another man’s wife openly. . . .
      Fourthly . . .”
    

      Von Koren hurriedly ate up his soup and gave his plate to the orderly.
    

      “I understood Laevsky from the first month of our acquaintance,”
      he went on, addressing the deacon. “We arrived here at the same
      time. Men like him are very fond of friendship, intimacy, solidarity, and
      all the rest of it, because they always want company for vint,
      drinking, and eating; besides, they are talkative and must have listeners.
      We made friends—that is, he turned up every day, hindered me
      working, and indulged in confidences in regard to his mistress. From the
      first he struck me by his exceptional falsity, which simply made me sick.
      As a friend I pitched into him, asking him why he drank too much, why he
      lived beyond his means and got into debt, why he did nothing and read
      nothing, why he had so little culture and so little knowledge; and in
      answer to all my questions he used to smile bitterly, sigh, and say:
      ‘I am a failure, a superfluous man’; or: ‘What do you
      expect, my dear fellow, from us, the debris of the serf-owning class?’
      or: ‘We are degenerate. . . .’ Or he would begin a long
      rigmarole about Onyegin, Petchorin, Byron’s Cain, and Bazarov, of
      whom he would say: ‘They are our fathers in flesh and in spirit.’
      So we are to understand that it was not his fault that Government
      envelopes lay unopened in his office for weeks together, and that he drank
      and taught others to drink, but Onyegin, Petchorin, and Turgenev, who had
      invented the failure and the superfluous man, were responsible for it. The
      cause of his extreme dissoluteness and unseemliness lies, do you see, not
      in himself, but somewhere outside in space. And so—an ingenious
      idea!—it is not only he who is dissolute, false, and disgusting, but
      we . . . ‘we men of the eighties,’ ‘we the spiritless,
      nervous offspring of the serf-owning class’; ‘civilisation has
      crippled us’ . . . in fact, we are to understand that such a great
      man as Laevsky is great even in his fall: that his dissoluteness, his lack
      of culture and of moral purity, is a phenomenon of natural history,
      sanctified by inevitability; that the causes of it are world-wide,
      elemental; and that we ought to hang up a lamp before Laevsky, since he is
      the fated victim of the age, of influences, of heredity, and so on. All
      the officials and their ladies were in ecstasies when they listened to
      him, and I could not make out for a long time what sort of man I had to
      deal with, a cynic or a clever rogue. Such types as he, on the surface
      intellectual with a smattering of education and a great deal of talk about
      their own nobility, are very clever in posing as exceptionally complex
      natures.”
    

      “Hold your tongue!” Samoylenko flared up. “I will not
      allow a splendid fellow to be spoken ill of in my presence!”
    

      “Don’t interrupt, Alexandr Daviditch,” said Von Koren
      coldly; “I am just finishing. Laevsky is by no means a complex
      organism. Here is his moral skeleton: in the morning, slippers, a bathe,
      and coffee; then till dinner-time, slippers, a constitutional, and
      conversation; at two o’clock slippers, dinner, and wine; at five o’clock
      a bathe, tea and wine, then vint and lying; at ten o’clock
      supper and wine; and after midnight sleep and la femme. His
      existence is confined within this narrow programme like an egg within its
      shell. Whether he walks or sits, is angry, writes, rejoices, it may all be
      reduced to wine, cards, slippers, and women. Woman plays a fatal,
      overwhelming part in his life. He tells us himself that at thirteen he was
      in love; that when he was a student in his first year he was living with a
      lady who had a good influence over him, and to whom he was indebted for
      his musical education. In his second year he bought a prostitute from a
      brothel and raised her to his level—that is, took her as his kept
      mistress, and she lived with him for six months and then ran away back to
      the brothel-keeper, and her flight caused him much spiritual suffering.
      Alas! his sufferings were so great that he had to leave the university and
      spend two years at home doing nothing. But this was all for the best. At
      home he made friends with a widow who advised him to leave the Faculty of
      Jurisprudence and go into the Faculty of Arts. And so he did. When he had
      taken his degree, he fell passionately in love with his present . . . what’s
      her name? . . . married lady, and was obliged to flee with her here to the
      Caucasus for the sake of his ideals, he would have us believe, seeing that
      . . . to-morrow, if not to-day, he will be tired of her and flee back
      again to Petersburg, and that, too, will be for the sake of his ideals.”
    

      “How do you know?” growled Samoylenko, looking angrily at the
      zoologist. “You had better eat your dinner.”
    

      The next course consisted of boiled mullet with Polish sauce. Samoylenko
      helped each of his companions to a whole mullet and poured out the sauce
      with his own hand. Two minutes passed in silence.
    

      “Woman plays an essential part in the life of every man,” said
      the deacon. “You can’t help that.”
    

      “Yes, but to what degree? For each of us woman means mother, sister,
      wife, friend. To Laevsky she is everything, and at the same time nothing
      but a mistress. She—that is, cohabitation with her— is the
      happiness and object of his life; he is gay, sad, bored, disenchanted—on
      account of woman; his life grows disagreeable —woman is to blame;
      the dawn of a new life begins to glow, ideals turn up—and again look
      for the woman. . . . He only derives enjoyment from books and pictures in
      which there is woman. Our age is, to his thinking, poor and inferior to
      the forties and the sixties only because we do not know how to abandon
      ourselves obviously to the passion and ecstasy of love. These voluptuaries
      must have in their brains a special growth of the nature of sarcoma, which
      stifles the brain and directs their whole psychology. Watch Laevsky when
      he is sitting anywhere in company. You notice: when one raises any general
      question in his presence, for instance, about the cell or instinct, he
      sits apart, and neither speaks nor listens; he looks languid and
      disillusioned; nothing has any interest for him, everything is vulgar and
      trivial. But as soon as you speak of male and female—for instance,
      of the fact that the female spider, after fertilisation, devours the male—his
      eyes glow with curiosity, his face brightens, and the man revives, in
      fact. All his thoughts, however noble, lofty, or neutral they may be, they
      all have one point of resemblance. You walk along the street with him and
      meet a donkey, for instance. . . . ‘Tell me, please,’ he asks,
      ‘what would happen if you mated a donkey with a camel?’ And
      his dreams! Has he told you of his dreams? It is magnificent! First, he
      dreams that he is married to the moon, then that he is summoned before the
      police and ordered to live with a guitar . . .”
    

      The deacon burst into resounding laughter; Samoylenko frowned and wrinkled
      up his face angrily so as not to laugh, but could not restrain himself,
      and laughed.
    

      “And it’s all nonsense!” he said, wiping his tears.
      “Yes, by Jove, it’s nonsense!”
    

      IV
    

      The deacon was very easily amused, and laughed at every trifle till he got
      a stitch in his side, till he was helpless. It seemed as though he only
      liked to be in people’s company because there was a ridiculous side
      to them, and because they might be given ridiculous nicknames. He had
      nicknamed Samoylenko “the tarantula,” his orderly “the
      drake,” and was in ecstasies when on one occasion Von Koren spoke of
      Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna as “Japanese monkeys.” He
      watched people’s faces greedily, listened without bGlinking, and it
      could be seen that his eyes filled with laughter and his face was tense
      with expectation of the moment when he could let himself go and burst into
      laughter.
    

      “He is a corrupt and depraved type,” the zoologist continued,
      while the deacon kept his eyes riveted on his face, expecting he would say
      something funny. “It is not often one can meet with such a
      nonentity. In body he is inert, feeble, prematurely old, while in
      intellect he differs in no respect from a fat shopkeeper’s wife who
      does nothing but eat, drink, and sleep on a feather-bed, and who keeps her
      coachman as a lover.”
    

      The deacon began guffawing again.
    

      “Don’t laugh, deacon,” said Von Koren. “It grows
      stupid, at last. I should not have paid attention to his insignificance,”
      he went on, after waiting till the deacon had left off laughing; “I
      should have passed him by if he were not so noxious and dangerous. His
      noxiousness lies first of all in the fact that he has great success with
      women, and so threatens to leave descendants—that is, to present the
      world with a dozen Laevskys as feeble and as depraved as himself.
      Secondly, he is in the highest degree contaminating. I have spoken to you
      already of vint and beer. In another year or two he will dominate
      the whole Caucasian coast. You know how the mass, especially its middle
      stratum, believe in intellectuality, in a university education, in
      gentlemanly manners, and in literary language. Whatever filthy thing he
      did, they would all believe that it was as it should be, since he is an
      intellectual man, of liberal ideas and university education. What is more,
      he is a failure, a superfluous man, a neurasthenic, a victim of the age,
      and that means he can do anything. He is a charming fellow, a regular good
      sort, he is so genuinely indulgent to human weaknesses; he is compliant,
      accommodating, easy and not proud; one can drink with him and gossip and
      talk evil of people. . . . The masses, always inclined to anthropomorphism
      in religion and morals, like best of all the little gods who have the same
      weaknesses as themselves. Only think what a wide field he has for
      contamination! Besides, he is not a bad actor and is a clever hypocrite,
      and knows very well how to twist things round. Only take his little shifts
      and dodges, his attitude to civilisation, for instance. He has scarcely
      sniffed at civilisation, yet: ‘Ah, how we have been crippled by
      civilisation! Ah, how I envy those savages, those children of nature, who
      know nothing of civilisation!’ We are to understand, you see, that
      at one time, in ancient days, he has been devoted to civilisation with his
      whole soul, has served it, has sounded it to its depths, but it has
      exhausted him, disillusioned him, deceived him; he is a Faust, do you see?—a
      second Tolstoy. . . . As for Schopenhauer and Spencer, he treats them like
      small boys and slaps them on the shoulder in a fatherly way: ‘Well,
      what do you say, old Spencer?’ He has not read Spencer, of course,
      but how charming he is when with light, careless irony he says of his lady
      friend: ‘She has read Spencer!’ And they all listen to him,
      and no one cares to understand that this charlatan has not the right to
      kiss the sole of Spencer’s foot, let alone speaking about him in
      that tone! Sapping the foundations of civilisation, of authority, of other
      people’s altars, spattering them with filth, winking jocosely at
      them only to justify and conceal one’s own rottenness and moral
      poverty is only possible for a very vain, base, and nasty creature.”
    

      “I don’t know what it is you expect of him, Kolya,” said
      Samoylenko, looking at the zoologist, not with anger now, but with a
      guilty air. “He is a man the same as every one else. Of course, he
      has his weaknesses, but he is abreast of modern ideas, is in the service,
      is of use to his country. Ten years ago there was an old fellow serving as
      agent here, a man of the greatest intelligence . . . and he used to say .
      . .”
    

      “Nonsense, nonsense!” the zoologist interrupted. “You
      say he is in the service; but how does he serve? Do you mean to tell me
      that things have been done better because he is here, and the officials
      are more punctual, honest, and civil? On the contrary, he has only
      sanctioned their slackness by his prestige as an intellectual university
      man. He is only punctual on the 20th of the month, when he gets his
      salary; on the other days he lounges about at home in slippers and tries
      to look as if he were doing the Government a great service by living in
      the Caucasus. No, Alexandr Daviditch, don’t stick up for him. You
      are insincere from beginning to end. If you really loved him and
      considered him your neighbour, you would above all not be indifferent to
      his weaknesses, you would not be indulgent to them, but for his own sake
      would try to make him innocuous.”
    

      “That is?”
    

      “Innocuous. Since he is incorrigible, he can only be made innocuous
      in one way. . . .” Von Koren passed his finger round his throat.
      “Or he might be drowned . . .”, he added. “In the
      interests of humanity and in their own interests, such people ought to be
      destroyed. They certainly ought.”
    

      “What are you saying?” muttered Samoylenko, getting up and
      looking with amazement at the zoologist’s calm, cold face. “Deacon,
      what is he saying? Why—are you in your senses?”
    

      “I don’t insist on the death penalty,” said Von Koren.
      “If it is proved that it is pernicious, devise something else. If we
      can’t destroy Laevsky, why then, isolate him, make him harmless,
      send him to hard labour.”
    

      “What are you saying!” said Samoylenko in horror. “With
      pepper, with pepper,” he cried in a voice of despair, seeing that
      the deacon was eating stuffed aubergines without pepper. “You with
      your great intellect, what are you saying! Send our friend, a proud
      intellectual man, to penal servitude!”
    

      “Well, if he is proud and tries to resist, put him in fetters!”
    

      Samoylenko could not utter a word, and only twiddled his fingers; the
      deacon looked at his flabbergasted and really absurd face, and laughed.
    

      “Let us leave off talking of that,” said the zoologist.
      “Only remember one thing, Alexandr Daviditch: primitive man was
      preserved from such as Laevsky by the struggle for existence and by
      natural selection; now our civilisation has considerably weakened the
      struggle and the selection, and we ought to look after the destruction of
      the rotten and worthless for ourselves; otherwise, when the Laevskys
      multiply, civilisation will perish and mankind will degenerate utterly. It
      will be our fault.”
    

      “If it depends on drowning and hanging,” said Samoylenko,
      “damnation take your civilisation, damnation take your humanity!
      Damnation take it! I tell you what: you are a very learned and intelligent
      man and the pride of your country, but the Germans have ruined you. Yes,
      the Germans! The Germans!”
    

      Since Samoylenko had left Dorpat, where he had studied medicine, he had
      rarely seen a German and had not read a single German book, but, in his
      opinion, every harmful idea in politics or science was due to the Germans.
      Where he had got this notion he could not have said himself, but he held
      it firmly.
    

      “Yes, the Germans!” he repeated once more. “Come and
      have some tea.”
    

      All three stood up, and putting on their hats, went out into the little
      garden, and sat there under the shade of the light green maples, the
      pear-trees, and a chestnut-tree. The zoologist and the deacon sat on a
      bench by the table, while Samoylenko sank into a deep wicker chair with a
      sloping back. The orderly handed them tea, jam, and a bottle of syrup.
    

      It was very hot, thirty degrees RÃ©aumur in the shade. The sultry air was
      stagnant and motionless, and a long spider-web, stretching from the
      chestnut-tree to the ground, hung limply and did not stir.
    

      The deacon took up the guitar, which was constantly lying on the ground
      near the table, tuned it, and began singing softly in a thin voice:
    

      “‘Gathered round the tavern were the seminary lads,’”
    

      but instantly subsided, overcome by the heat, mopped his brow and glanced
      upwards at the blazing blue sky. Samoylenko grew drowsy; the sultry heat,
      the stillness and the delicious after-dinner languor, which quickly
      pervaded all his limbs, made him feel heavy and sleepy; his arms dropped
      at his sides, his eyes grew small, his head sank on his breast. He looked
      with almost tearful tenderness at Von Koren and the deacon, and muttered:
    

      “The younger generation. . . A scientific star and a luminary of the
      Church. . . . I shouldn’t wonder if the long-skirted alleluia will
      be shooting up into a bishop; I dare say I may come to kissing his hand. .
      . . Well . . . please God. . . .”
    

      Soon a snore was heard. Von Koren and the deacon finished their tea and
      went out into the street.
    

      “Are you going to the harbour again to catch sea-gudgeon?”
      asked the zoologist.
    

      “No, it’s too hot.”
    

      “Come and see me. You can pack up a parcel and copy something for
      me. By the way, we must have a talk about what you are to do. You must
      work, deacon. You can’t go on like this.”
    

      “Your words are just and logical,” said the deacon. “But
      my laziness finds an excuse in the circumstances of my present life. You
      know yourself that an uncertain position has a great tendency to make
      people apathetic. God only knows whether I have been sent here for a time
      or permanently. I am living here in uncertainty, while my wife is
      vegetating at her father’s and is missing me. And I must confess my
      brain is melting with the heat.”
    

      “That’s all nonsense,” said the zoologist. “You
      can get used to the heat, and you can get used to being without the
      deaconess. You mustn’t be slack; you must pull yourself together.”
    

      V
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna went to bathe in the morning, and her cook, Olga,
      followed her with a jug, a copper basin, towels, and a sponge. In the bay
      stood two unknown steamers with dirty white funnels, obviously foreign
      cargo vessels. Some men dressed in white and wearing white shoes were
      walking along the harbour, shouting loudly in French, and were answered
      from the steamers. The bells were ringing briskly in the little church of
      the town.
    

      “To-day is Sunday!” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna remembered with
      pleasure.
    

      She felt perfectly well, and was in a gay holiday humour. In a new
      loose-fitting dress of coarse thick tussore silk, and a big wide-brimmed
      straw hat which was bent down over her ears, so that her face looked out
      as though from a basket, she fancied she looked very charming. She thought
      that in the whole town there was only one young, pretty, intellectual
      woman, and that was herself, and that she was the only one who knew how to
      dress herself cheaply, elegantly, and with taste. That dress, for example,
      cost only twenty-two roubles, and yet how charming it was! In the whole
      town she was the only one who could be attractive, while there were
      numbers of men, so they must all, whether they would or not, be envious of
      Laevsky.
    

      She was glad that of late Laevsky had been cold to her, reserved and
      polite, and at times even harsh and rude; in the past she had met all his
      outbursts, all his contemptuous, cold or strange incomprehensible glances,
      with tears, reproaches, and threats to leave him or to starve herself to
      death; now she only blushed, looked guiltily at him, and was glad he was
      not affectionate to her. If he had abused her, threatened her, it would
      have been better and pleasanter, since she felt hopelessly guilty towards
      him. She felt she was to blame, in the first place, for not sympathising
      with the dreams of a life of hard work, for the sake of which he had given
      up Petersburg and had come here to the Caucasus, and she was convinced
      that he had been angry with her of late for precisely that. When she was
      travelling to the Caucasus, it seemed that she would find here on the
      first day a cosy nook by the sea, a snug little garden with shade, with
      birds, with little brooks, where she could grow flowers and vegetables,
      rear ducks and hens, entertain her neighbours, doctor poor peasants and
      distribute little books amongst them. It had turned out that the Caucasus
      was nothing but bare mountains, forests, and huge valleys, where it took a
      long time and a great deal of effort to find anything and settle down;
      that there were no neighbours of any sort; that it was very hot and one
      might be robbed. Laevsky had been in no hurry to obtain a piece of land;
      she was glad of it, and they seemed to be in a tacit compact never to
      allude to a life of hard work. He was silent about it, she thought,
      because he was angry with her for being silent about it.
    

      In the second place, she had without his knowledge during those two years
      bought various trifles to the value of three hundred roubles at Atchmianov’s
      shop. She had bought the things by degrees, at one time materials, at
      another time silk or a parasol, and the debt had grown imperceptibly.
    

      “I will tell him about it to-day . . .”, she used to decide,
      but at once reflected that in Laevsky’s present mood it would hardly
      be convenient to talk to him of debts.
    

      Thirdly, she had on two occasions in Laevsky’s absence received a
      visit from Kirilin, the police captain: once in the morning when Laevsky
      had gone to bathe, and another time at midnight when he was playing cards.
      Remembering this, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna flushed crimson, and looked round
      at the cook as though she might overhear her thoughts. The long,
      insufferably hot, wearisome days, beautiful languorous evenings and
      stifling nights, and the whole manner of living, when from morning to
      night one is at a loss to fill up the useless hours, and the persistent
      thought that she was the prettiest young woman in the town, and that her
      youth was passing and being wasted, and Laevsky himself, though honest and
      idealistic, always the same, always lounging about in his slippers, biting
      his nails, and wearying her with his caprices, led by degrees to her
      becoming possessed by desire, and as though she were mad, she thought of
      nothing else day and night. Breathing, looking, walking, she felt nothing
      but desire. The sound of the sea told her she must love; the darkness of
      evening—the same; the mountains—the same. . . . And when
      Kirilin began paying her attentions, she had neither the power nor the
      wish to resist, and surrendered to him. . . .
    

      Now the foreign steamers and the men in white reminded her for some reason
      of a huge hall; together with the shouts of French she heard the strains
      of a waltz, and her bosom heaved with unaccountable delight. She longed to
      dance and talk French.
    

      She reflected joyfully that there was nothing terrible about her
      infidelity. Her soul had no part in her infidelity; she still loved
      Laevsky, and that was proved by the fact that she was jealous of him, was
      sorry for him, and missed him when he was away. Kirilin had turned out to
      be very mediocre, rather coarse though handsome; everything was broken off
      with him already and there would never be anything more. What had happened
      was over; it had nothing to do with any one, and if Laevsky found it out
      he would not believe in it.
    

      There was only one bathing-house for ladies on the sea-front; men bathed
      under the open sky. Going into the bathing-house, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna
      found there an elderly lady, Marya Konstantinovna Bityugov, and her
      daughter Katya, a schoolgirl of fifteen; both of them were sitting on a
      bench undressing. Marya Konstantinovna was a good-natured, enthusiastic,
      and genteel person, who talked in a drawling and pathetic voice. She had
      been a governess until she was thirty-two, and then had married Bityugov,
      a Government official—a bald little man with his hair combed on to
      his temples and with a very meek disposition. She was still in love with
      him, was jealous, blushed at the word “love,” and told every
      one she was very happy.
    

      “My dear,” she cried enthusiastically, on seeing Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, assuming an expression which all her acquaintances called
      “almond-oily.” “My dear, how delightful that you have
      come! We’ll bathe together —that’s enchanting!”
    

      Olga quickly flung off her dress and chemise, and began undressing her
      mistress.
    

      “It’s not quite so hot to-day as yesterday?” said
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, shrinking at the coarse touch of the naked cook.
      “Yesterday I almost died of the heat.”
    

      “Oh, yes, my dear; I could hardly breathe myself. Would you believe
      it? I bathed yesterday three times! Just imagine, my dear, three times!
      Nikodim Alexandritch was quite uneasy.”
    

      “Is it possible to be so ugly?” thought Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      looking at Olga and the official’s wife; she glanced at Katya and
      thought: “The little girl’s not badly made.”
    

      “Your Nikodim Alexandritch is very charming!” she said.
      “I’m simply in love with him.”
    

      “Ha, ha, ha!” cried Marya Konstantinovna, with a forced laugh;
      “that’s quite enchanting.”
    

      Free from her clothes, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna felt a desire to fly. And it
      seemed to her that if she were to wave her hands she would fly upwards.
      When she was undressed, she noticed that Olga looked scornfully at her
      white body. Olga, a young soldier’s wife, was living with her lawful
      husband, and so considered herself superior to her mistress. Marya
      Konstantinovna and Katya were afraid of her, and did not respect her. This
      was disagreeable, and to raise herself in their opinion, Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna said:
    

      “At home, in Petersburg, summer villa life is at its height now. My
      husband and I have so many friends! We ought to go and see them.”
    

      “I believe your husband is an engineer?” said Marya
      Konstantinovna timidly.
    

      “I am speaking of Laevsky. He has a great many acquaintances. But
      unfortunately his mother is a proud aristocrat, not very intelligent. . .
      .”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna threw herself into the water without finishing; Marya
      Konstantinovna and Katya made their way in after her.
    

      “There are so many conventional ideas in the world,” Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna went on, “and life is not so easy as it seems.”
    

      Marya Konstantinovna, who had been a governess in aristocratic families
      and who was an authority on social matters, said:
    

      “Oh yes! Would you believe me, my dear, at the Garatynskys’ I
      was expected to dress for lunch as well as for dinner, so that, like an
      actress, I received a special allowance for my wardrobe in addition to my
      salary.”
    

      She stood between Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and Katya as though to screen her
      daughter from the water that washed the former.
    

      Through the open doors looking out to the sea they could see some one
      swimming a hundred paces from their bathing-place.
    

      “Mother, it’s our Kostya,” said Katya.
    

      “Ach, ach!” Marya Konstantinovna cackled in her dismay.
      “Ach, Kostya!” she shouted, “Come back! Kostya, come
      back!”
    

      Kostya, a boy of fourteen, to show off his prowess before his mother and
      sister, dived and swam farther, but began to be exhausted and hurried
      back, and from his strained and serious face it could be seen that he
      could not trust his own strength.
    

      “The trouble one has with these boys, my dear!” said Marya
      Konstantinovna, growing calmer. “Before you can turn round, he will
      break his neck. Ah, my dear, how sweet it is, and yet at the same time how
      difficult, to be a mother! One’s afraid of everything.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna put on her straw hat and dashed out into the open
      sea. She swam some thirty feet and then turned on her back. She could see
      the sea to the horizon, the steamers, the people on the sea-front, the
      town; and all this, together with the sultry heat and the soft,
      transparent waves, excited her and whispered that she must live, live. . .
      . A sailing-boat darted by her rapidly and vigorously, cleaving the waves
      and the air; the man sitting at the helm looked at her, and she liked
      being looked at. . . .
    

      After bathing, the ladies dressed and went away together.
    

      “I have fever every alternate day, and yet I don’t get thin,”
      said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, licking her lips, which were salt from the
      bathe, and responding with a smile to the bows of her acquaintances.
      “I’ve always been plump, and now I believe I’m plumper
      than ever.”
    

      “That, my dear, is constitutional. If, like me, one has no
      constitutional tendency to stoutness, no diet is of any use. . . . But you’ve
      wetted your hat, my dear.”
    

      “It doesn’t matter; it will dry.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna saw again the men in white who were walking on the
      sea-front and talking French; and again she felt a sudden thrill of joy,
      and had a vague memory of some big hall in which she had once danced, or
      of which, perhaps, she had once dreamed. And something at the bottom of
      her soul dimly and obscurely whispered to her that she was a pretty,
      common, miserable, worthless woman. . . .
    

      Marya Konstantinovna stopped at her gate and asked her to come in and sit
      down for a little while.
    

      “Come in, my dear,” she said in an imploring voice, and at the
      same time she looked at Nadyezhda Fyodorovna with anxiety and hope;
      perhaps she would refuse and not come in!
    

      “With pleasure,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, accepting. “You
      know how I love being with you!”
    

      And she went into the house. Marya Konstantinovna sat her down and gave
      her coffee, regaled her with milk rolls, then showed her photographs of
      her former pupils, the Garatynskys, who were by now married. She showed
      her, too, the examination reports of Kostya and Katya. The reports were
      very good, but to make them seem even better, she complained, with a sigh,
      how difficult the lessons at school were now. . . . She made much of her
      visitor, and was sorry for her, though at the same time she was harassed
      by the thought that Nadyezhda Fyodorovna might have a corrupting influence
      on the morals of Kostya and Katya, and was glad that her Nikodim
      Alexandritch was not at home. Seeing that in her opinion all men are fond
      of “women like that,” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna might have a bad
      effect on Nikodim Alexandritch too.
    

      As she talked to her visitor, Marya Konstantinovna kept remembering that
      they were to have a picnic that evening, and that Von Koren had
      particularly begged her to say nothing about it to the “Japanese
      monkeys”—that is, Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna; but she
      dropped a word about it unawares, crimsoned, and said in confusion:
    

      “I hope you will come too!”
    

      VI
    

      It was agreed to drive about five miles out of town on the road to the
      south, to stop near a duhan at the junction of two streams —the
      Black River and the Yellow River—and to cook fish soup. They started
      out soon after five. Foremost of the party in a char-Ã -banc drove
      Samoylenko and Laevsky; they were followed by Marya Konstantinovna,
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, Katya and Kostya, in a coach with three horses,
      carrying with them the crockery and a basket with provisions. In the next
      carriage came the police captain, Kirilin, and the young Atchmianov, the
      son of the shopkeeper to whom Nadyezhda Fyodorovna owed three hundred
      roubles; opposite them, huddled up on the little seat with his feet tucked
      under him, sat Nikodim Alexandritch, a neat little man with hair combed on
      to his temples. Last of all came Von Koren and the deacon; at the deacon’s
      feet stood a basket of fish.
    

      “R-r-right!” Samoylenko shouted at the top of his voice when
      he met a cart or a mountaineer riding on a donkey.
    

      “In two years’ time, when I shall have the means and the
      people ready, I shall set off on an expedition,” Von Koren was
      telling the deacon. “I shall go by the sea-coast from Vladivostok to
      the Behring Straits, and then from the Straits to the mouth of the
      Yenisei. We shall make the map, study the fauna and the flora, and make
      detailed geological, anthropological, and ethnographical researches. It
      depends upon you to go with me or not.”
    

      “It’s impossible,” said the deacon.
    

      “Why?”
    

      “I’m a man with ties and a family.”
    

      “Your wife will let you go; we will provide for her. Better still if
      you were to persuade her for the public benefit to go into a nunnery; that
      would make it possible for you to become a monk, too, and join the
      expedition as a priest. I can arrange it for you.”
    

      The deacon was silent.
    

      “Do you know your theology well?” asked the zoologist.
    

      “No, rather badly.”
    

      “H’m! . . . I can’t give you any advice on that score,
      because I don’t know much about theology myself. You give me a list
      of books you need, and I will send them to you from Petersburg in the
      winter. It will be necessary for you to read the notes of religious
      travellers, too; among them are some good ethnologists and Oriental
      scholars. When you are familiar with their methods, it will be easier for
      you to set to work. And you needn’t waste your time till you get the
      books; come to me, and we will study the compass and go through a course
      of meteorology. All that’s indispensable.”
    

      “To be sure . . .” muttered the deacon, and he laughed.
      “I was trying to get a place in Central Russia, and my uncle, the
      head priest, promised to help me. If I go with you I shall have troubled
      them for nothing.”
    

      “I don’t understand your hesitation. If you go on being an
      ordinary deacon, who is only obliged to hold a service on holidays, and on
      the other days can rest from work, you will be exactly the same as you are
      now in ten years’ time, and will have gained nothing but a beard and
      moustache; while on returning from this expedition in ten years’
      time you will be a different man, you will be enriched by the
      consciousness that something has been done by you.”
    

      From the ladies’ carriage came shrieks of terror and delight. The
      carriages were driving along a road hollowed in a literally overhanging
      precipitous cliff, and it seemed to every one that they were galloping
      along a shelf on a steep wall, and that in a moment the carriages would
      drop into the abyss. On the right stretched the sea; on the left was a
      rough brown wall with black blotches and red veins and with climbing
      roots; while on the summit stood shaggy fir-trees bent over, as though
      looking down in terror and curiosity. A minute later there were shrieks
      and laughter again: they had to drive under a huge overhanging rock.
    

      “I don’t know why the devil I’m coming with you,”
      said Laevsky. “How stupid and vulgar it is! I want to go to the
      North, to run away, to escape; but here I am, for some reason, going to
      this stupid picnic.”
    

      “But look, what a view!” said Samoylenko as the horses turned
      to the left, and the valley of the Yellow River came into sight and the
      stream itself gleamed in the sunlight, yellow, turbid, frantic.
    

      “I see nothing fine in that, Sasha,” answered Laevsky. “To
      be in continual ecstasies over nature shows poverty of imagination. In
      comparison with what my imagination can give me, all these streams and
      rocks are trash, and nothing else.”
    

      The carriages now were by the banks of the stream. The high mountain banks
      gradually grew closer, the valley shrank together and ended in a gorge;
      the rocky mountain round which they were driving had been piled together
      by nature out of huge rocks, pressing upon each other with such terrible
      weight, that Samoylenko could not help gasping every time he looked at
      them. The dark and beautiful mountain was cleft in places by narrow
      fissures and gorges from which came a breath of dewy moisture and mystery;
      through the gorges could be seen other mountains, brown, pink, lilac,
      smoky, or bathed in vivid sunlight. From time to time as they passed a
      gorge they caught the sound of water falling from the heights and
      splashing on the stones.
    

      “Ach, the damned mountains!” sighed Laevsky. “How sick I
      am of them!”
    

      At the place where the Black River falls into the Yellow, and the water
      black as ink stains the yellow and struggles with it, stood the Tatar
      Kerbalay’s duhan, with the Russian flag on the roof and with
      an inscription written in chalk: “The Pleasant duhan.”
      Near it was a little garden, enclosed in a hurdle fence, with tables and
      chairs set out in it, and in the midst of a thicket of wretched
      thornbushes stood a single solitary cypress, dark and beautiful.
    

      Kerbalay, a nimble little Tatar in a blue shirt and a white apron, was
      standing in the road, and, holding his stomach, he bowed low to welcome
      the carriages, and smiled, showing his glistening white teeth.
    

      “Good-evening, Kerbalay,” shouted Samoylenko. “We are
      driving on a little further, and you take along the samovar and chairs!
      Look sharp!”
    

      Kerbalay nodded his shaven head and muttered something, and only those
      sitting in the last carriage could hear: “We’ve got trout,
      your Excellency.”
    

      “Bring them, bring them!” said Von Koren.
    

      Five hundred paces from the duhan the carriages stopped. Samoylenko
      selected a small meadow round which there were scattered stones convenient
      for sitting on, and a fallen tree blown down by the storm with roots
      overgrown by moss and dry yellow needles. Here there was a fragile wooden
      bridge over the stream, and just opposite on the other bank there was a
      little barn for drying maize, standing on four low piles, and looking like
      the hut on hen’s legs in the fairy tale; a little ladder sloped from
      its door.
    

      The first impression in all was a feeling that they would never get out of
      that place again. On all sides wherever they looked, the mountains rose up
      and towered above them, and the shadows of evening were stealing rapidly,
      rapidly from the duhan and dark cypress, making the narrow winding
      valley of the Black River narrower and the mountains higher. They could
      hear the river murmuring and the unceasing chirrup of the grasshoppers.
    

      “Enchanting!” said Marya Konstantinovna, heaving deep sighs of
      ecstasy. “Children, look how fine! What peace!”
    

      “Yes, it really is fine,” assented Laevsky, who liked the
      view, and for some reason felt sad as he looked at the sky and then at the
      blue smoke rising from the chimney of the duhan. “Yes, it is
      fine,” he repeated.
    

      “Ivan Andreitch, describe this view,” Marya Konstantinovna
      said tearfully.
    

      “Why?” asked Laevsky. “The impression is better than any
      description. The wealth of sights and sounds which every one receives from
      nature by direct impression is ranted about by authors in a hideous and
      unrecognisable way.”
    

      “Really?” Von Koren asked coldly, choosing the biggest stone
      by the side of the water, and trying to clamber up and sit upon it.
      “Really?” he repeated, looking directly at Laevsky. “What
      of ‘Romeo and Juliet’? Or, for instance, Pushkin’s
      ‘Night in the Ukraine’? Nature ought to come and bow down at
      their feet.”
    

      “Perhaps,” said Laevsky, who was too lazy to think and oppose
      him. “Though what is ‘Romeo and Juliet’ after all?”
      he added after a short pause. “The beauty of poetry and holiness of
      love are simply the roses under which they try to hide its rottenness.
      Romeo is just the same sort of animal as all the rest of us.”
    

      “Whatever one talks to you about, you always bring it round to . . .”
      Von Koren glanced round at Katya and broke off.
    

      “What do I bring it round to?” asked Laevsky.
    

      “One tells you, for instance, how beautiful a bunch of grapes is,
      and you answer: ‘Yes, but how ugly it is when it is chewed and
      digested in one’s stomach!’ Why say that? It’s not new,
      and . . . altogether it is a queer habit.”
    

      Laevsky knew that Von Koren did not like him, and so was afraid of him,
      and felt in his presence as though every one were constrained and some one
      were standing behind his back. He made no answer and walked away, feeling
      sorry he had come.
    

      “Gentlemen, quick march for brushwood for the fire!” commanded
      Samoylenko.
    

      They all wandered off in different directions, and no one was left but
      Kirilin, Atchmianov, and Nikodim Alexandritch. Kerbalay brought chairs,
      spread a rug on the ground, and set a few bottles of wine.
    

      The police captain, Kirilin, a tall, good-looking man, who in all weathers
      wore his great-coat over his tunic, with his haughty deportment, stately
      carriage, and thick, rather hoarse voice, looked like a young provincial
      chief of police; his expression was mournful and sleepy, as though he had
      just been waked against his will.
    

      “What have you brought this for, you brute?” he asked
      Kerbalay, deliberately articulating each word. “I ordered you to
      give us kvarel, and what have you brought, you ugly Tatar? Eh?
      What?”
    

      “We have plenty of wine of our own, Yegor Alekseitch,” Nikodim
      Alexandritch observed, timidly and politely.
    

      “What? But I want us to have my wine, too; I’m taking part in
      the picnic and I imagine I have full right to contribute my share. I
      im-ma-gine so! Bring ten bottles of kvarel.”
    

      “Why so many?” asked Nikodim Alexandritch, in wonder, knowing
      Kirilin had no money.
    

      “Twenty bottles! Thirty!” shouted Kirilin.
    

      “Never mind, let him,” Atchmianov whispered to Nikodim
      Alexandritch; “I’ll pay.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was in a light-hearted, mischievous mood; she wanted
      to skip and jump, to laugh, to shout, to tease, to flirt. In her cheap
      cotton dress with blue pansies on it, in her red shoes and the same straw
      hat, she seemed to herself, little, simple, light, ethereal as a
      butterfly. She ran over the rickety bridge and looked for a minute into
      the water, in order to feel giddy; then, shrieking and laughing, ran to
      the other side to the drying-shed, and she fancied that all the men were
      admiring her, even Kerbalay. When in the rapidly falling darkness the
      trees began to melt into the mountains and the horses into the carriages,
      and a light gleamed in the windows of the duhan, she climbed up the
      mountain by the little path which zigzagged between stones and
      thorn-bushes and sat on a stone. Down below, the camp-fire was burning.
      Near the fire, with his sleeves tucked up, the deacon was moving to and
      fro, and his long black shadow kept describing a circle round it; he put
      on wood, and with a spoon tied to a long stick he stirred the cauldron.
      Samoylenko, with a copper-red face, was fussing round the fire just as
      though he were in his own kitchen, shouting furiously:
    

      “Where’s the salt, gentlemen? I bet you’ve forgotten it.
      Why are you all sitting about like lords while I do the work?”
    

      Laevsky and Nikodim Alexandritch were sitting side by side on the fallen
      tree looking pensively at the fire. Marya Konstantinovna, Katya, and
      Kostya were taking the cups, saucers, and plates out of the baskets. Von
      Koren, with his arms folded and one foot on a stone, was standing on a
      bank at the very edge of the water, thinking about something. Patches of
      red light from the fire moved together with the shadows over the ground
      near the dark human figures, and quivered on the mountain, on the trees,
      on the bridge, on the drying-shed; on the other side the steep,
      scooped-out bank was all lighted up and glimmering in the stream, and the
      rushing turbid water broke its reflection into little bits.
    

      The deacon went for the fish which Kerbalay was cleaning and washing on
      the bank, but he stood still half-way and looked about him.
    

      “My God, how nice it is!” he thought. “People, rocks,
      the fire, the twilight, a monstrous tree—nothing more, and yet how
      fine it is!”
    

      On the further bank some unknown persons made their appearance near the
      drying-shed. The flickering light and the smoke from the camp-fire puffing
      in that direction made it impossible to get a full view of them all at
      once, but glimpses were caught now of a shaggy hat and a grey beard, now
      of a blue shirt, now of a figure, ragged from shoulder to knee, with a
      dagger across the body; then a swarthy young face with black eyebrows, as
      thick and bold as though they had been drawn in charcoal. Five of them sat
      in a circle on the ground, and the other five went into the drying-shed.
      One was standing at the door with his back to the fire, and with his hands
      behind his back was telling something, which must have been very
      interesting, for when Samoylenko threw on twigs and the fire flared up,
      and scattered sparks and threw a glaring light on the shed, two calm
      countenances with an expression on them of deep attention could be seen,
      looking out of the door, while those who were sitting in a circle turned
      round and began listening to the speaker. Soon after, those sitting in a
      circle began softly singing something slow and melodious, that sounded
      like Lenten Church music. . . . Listening to them, the deacon imagined how
      it would be with him in ten years’ time, when he would come back
      from the expedition: he would be a young priest and monk, an author with a
      name and a splendid past; he would be consecrated an archimandrite, then a
      bishop; and he would serve mass in the cathedral; in a golden mitre he
      would come out into the body of the church with the ikon on his breast,
      and blessing the mass of the people with the triple and the double
      candelabra, would proclaim: “Look down from Heaven, O God, behold
      and visit this vineyard which Thy Hand has planted,” and the
      children with their angel voices would sing in response: “Holy God.
      . .”
    

      “Deacon, where is that fish?” he heard Samoylenko’s
      voice.
    

      As he went back to the fire, the deacon imagined the Church procession
      going along a dusty road on a hot July day; in front the peasants carrying
      the banners and the women and children the ikons, then the boy choristers
      and the sacristan with his face tied up and a straw in his hair, then in
      due order himself, the deacon, and behind him the priest wearing his calotte
      and carrying a cross, and behind them, tramping in the dust, a crowd of
      peasants—men, women, and children; in the crowd his wife and the
      priest’s wife with kerchiefs on their heads. The choristers sing,
      the babies cry, the corncrakes call, the lark carols. . . . Then they make
      a stand and sprinkle the herd with holy water. . . . They go on again, and
      then kneeling pray for rain. Then lunch and talk. . . .
    

      “And that’s nice too . . .” thought the deacon.
    

      VII
    

      Kirilin and Atchmianov climbed up the mountain by the path. Atchmianov
      dropped behind and stopped, while Kirilin went up to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna.
    

      “Good-evening,” he said, touching his cap.
    

      “Good-evening.”
    

      “Yes!” said Kirilin, looking at the sky and pondering.
    

      “Why ‘yes’?” asked Nadyezhda Fyodorovna after a
      brief pause, noticing that Atchmianov was watching them both.
    

      “And so it seems,” said the officer, slowly, “that our
      love has withered before it has blossomed, so to speak. How do you wish me
      to understand it? Is it a sort of coquetry on your part, or do you look
      upon me as a nincompoop who can be treated as you choose.”
    

      “It was a mistake! Leave me alone!” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna said
      sharply, on that beautiful, marvellous evening, looking at him with terror
      and asking herself with bewilderment, could there really have been a
      moment when that man attracted her and had been near to her?
    

      “So that’s it!” said Kirilin; he thought in silence for
      a few minutes and said: “Well, I’ll wait till you are in a
      better humour, and meanwhile I venture to assure you I am a gentleman, and
      I don’t allow any one to doubt it. Adieu!”
    

      He touched his cap again and walked off, making his way between the
      bushes. After a short interval Atchmianov approached hesitatingly.
    

      “What a fine evening!” he said with a slight Armenian accent.
    

      He was nice-looking, fashionably dressed, and behaved unaffectedly like a
      well-bred youth, but Nadyezhda Fyodorovna did not like him because she
      owed his father three hundred roubles; it was displeasing to her, too,
      that a shopkeeper had been asked to the picnic, and she was vexed at his
      coming up to her that evening when her heart felt so pure.
    

      “The picnic is a success altogether,” he said, after a pause.
    

      “Yes,” she agreed, and as though suddenly remembering her
      debt, she said carelessly: “Oh, tell them in your shop that Ivan
      Andreitch will come round in a day or two and will pay three hundred
      roubles . . . . I don’t remember exactly what it is.”
    

      “I would give another three hundred if you would not mention that
      debt every day. Why be prosaic?”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna laughed; the amusing idea occurred to her that if she
      had been willing and sufficiently immoral she might in one minute be free
      from her debt. If she, for instance, were to turn the head of this
      handsome young fool! How amusing, absurd, wild it would be really! And she
      suddenly felt a longing to make him love her, to plunder him, throw him
      over, and then to see what would come of it.
    

      “Allow me to give you one piece of advice,” Atchmianov said
      timidly. “I beg you to beware of Kirilin. He says horrible things
      about you everywhere.”
    

      “It doesn’t interest me to know what every fool says of me,”
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna said coldly, and the amusing thought of playing with
      handsome young Atchmianov suddenly lost its charm.
    

      “We must go down,” she said; “they’re calling us.”
    

      The fish soup was ready by now. They were ladling it out by platefuls, and
      eating it with the religious solemnity with which this is only done at a
      picnic; and every one thought the fish soup very good, and thought that at
      home they had never eaten anything so nice. As is always the case at
      picnics, in the mass of dinner napkins, parcels, useless greasy papers
      fluttering in the wind, no one knew where was his glass or where his
      bread. They poured the wine on the carpet and on their own knees, spilt
      the salt, while it was dark all round them and the fire burnt more dimly,
      and every one was too lazy to get up and put wood on. They all drank wine,
      and even gave Kostya and Katya half a glass each. Nadyezhda Fyodorovna
      drank one glass and then another, got a little drunk and forgot about
      Kirilin.
    

      “A splendid picnic, an enchanting evening,” said Laevsky,
      growing lively with the wine. “But I should prefer a fine winter to
      all this. ‘His beaver collar is silver with hoar-frost.’”
    

      “Every one to his taste,” observed Von Koren.
    

      Laevsky felt uncomfortable; the heat of the campfire was beating upon his
      back, and the hatred of Von Koren upon his breast and face: this hatred on
      the part of a decent, clever man, a feeling in which there probably lay
      hid a well-grounded reason, humiliated him and enervated him, and unable
      to stand up against it, he said in a propitiatory tone:
    

      “I am passionately fond of nature, and I regret that I’m not a
      naturalist. I envy you.”
    

      “Well, I don’t envy you, and don’t regret it,”
      said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. “I don’t understand how any one can
      seriously interest himself in beetles and ladybirds while the people are
      suffering.”
    

      Laevsky shared her opinion. He was absolutely ignorant of natural science,
      and so could never reconcile himself to the authoritative tone and the
      learned and profound air of the people who devoted themselves to the
      whiskers of ants and the claws of beetles, and he always felt vexed that
      these people, relying on these whiskers, claws, and something they called
      protoplasm (he always imagined it in the form of an oyster), should
      undertake to decide questions involving the origin and life of man. But in
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s words he heard a note of falsity, and simply
      to contradict her he said: “The point is not the ladybirds, but the
      deductions made from them.”
    

      VIII
    

      It was late, eleven o’clock, when they began to get into the
      carriages to go home. They took their seats, and the only ones missing
      were Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and Atchmianov, who were running after one
      another, laughing, the other side of the stream.
    

      “Make haste, my friends,” shouted Samoylenko.
    

      “You oughtn’t to give ladies wine,” said Von Koren in a
      low voice.
    

      Laevsky, exhausted by the picnic, by the hatred of Von Koren, and by his
      own thoughts, went to meet Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and when, gay and happy,
      feeling light as a feather, breathless and laughing, she took him by both
      hands and laid her head on his breast, he stepped back and said dryly:
    

      “You are behaving like a . . . cocotte.”
    

      It sounded horribly coarse, so that he felt sorry for her at once. On his
      angry, exhausted face she read hatred, pity and vexation with himself, and
      her heart sank at once. She realised instantly that she had gone too far,
      had been too free and easy in her behaviour, and overcome with misery,
      feeling herself heavy, stout, coarse, and drunk, she got into the first
      empty carriage together with Atchmianov. Laevsky got in with Kirilin, the
      zoologist with Samoylenko, the deacon with the ladies, and the party set
      off.
    

      “You see what the Japanese monkeys are like,” Von Koren began,
      rolling himself up in his cloak and shutting his eyes. “You heard
      she doesn’t care to take an interest in beetles and ladybirds
      because the people are suffering. That’s how all the Japanese
      monkeys look upon people like us. They’re a slavish, cunning race,
      terrified by the whip and the fist for ten generations; they tremble and
      burn incense only before violence; but let the monkey into a free state
      where there’s no one to take it by the collar, and it relaxes at
      once and shows itself in its true colours. Look how bold they are in
      picture galleries, in museums, in theatres, or when they talk of science:
      they puff themselves out and get excited, they are abusive and critical .
      . . they are bound to criticise—it’s the sign of the slave.
      You listen: men of the liberal professions are more often sworn at than
      pickpockets—that’s because three-quarters of society are made
      up of slaves, of just such monkeys. It never happens that a slave holds
      out his hand to you and sincerely says ‘Thank you’ to you for
      your work.”
    

      “I don’t know what you want,” said Samoylenko, yawning;
      “the poor thing, in the simplicity of her heart, wanted to talk to
      you of scientific subjects, and you draw a conclusion from that. You’re
      cross with him for something or other, and with her, too, to keep him
      company. She’s a splendid woman.”
    

      “Ah, nonsense! An ordinary kept woman, depraved and vulgar. Listen,
      Alexandr Daviditch; when you meet a simple peasant woman, who isn’t
      living with her husband, who does nothing but giggle, you tell her to go
      and work. Why are you timid in this case and afraid to tell the truth?
      Simply because Nadyezhda Fyodorovna is kept, not by a sailor, but by an
      official.”
    

      “What am I to do with her?” said Samoylenko, getting angry.
      “Beat her or what?
    

      “Not flatter vice. We curse vice only behind its back, and that’s
      like making a long nose at it round a corner. I am a zoologist or a
      sociologist, which is the same thing; you are a doctor; society believes
      in us; we ought to point out the terrible harm which threatens it and the
      next generation from the existence of ladies like Nadyezhda Ivanovna.”
    

      “Fyodorovna,” Samoylenko corrected. “But what ought
      society to do?”
    

      “Society? That’s its affair. To my thinking the surest and
      most direct method is—compulsion. Manu militari she ought to
      be returned to her husband; and if her husband won’t take her in,
      then she ought to be sent to penal servitude or some house of correction.”
    

      “Ouf!” sighed Samoylenko. He paused and asked quietly: “You
      said the other day that people like Laevsky ought to be destroyed. . . .
      Tell me, if you . . . if the State or society commissioned you to destroy
      him, could you . . . bring yourself to it?”
    

      “My hand would not tremble.”
    

      IX
    

      When they got home, Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna went into their dark,
      stuffy, dull rooms. Both were silent. Laevsky lighted a candle, while
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna sat down, and without taking off her cloak and hat,
      lifted her melancholy, guilty eyes to him.
    

      He knew that she expected an explanation from him, but an explanation
      would be wearisome, useless and exhausting, and his heart was heavy
      because he had lost control over himself and been rude to her. He chanced
      to feel in his pocket the letter which he had been intending every day to
      read to her, and thought if he were to show her that letter now, it would
      turn her thoughts in another direction.
    

      “It is time to define our relations,” he thought. “I
      will give it her; what is to be will be.”
    

      He took out the letter and gave it her.
    

      “Read it. It concerns you.”
    

      Saying this, he went into his own room and lay down on the sofa in the
      dark without a pillow. Nadyezhda Fyodorovna read the letter, and it seemed
      to her as though the ceiling were falling and the walls were closing in on
      her. It seemed suddenly dark and shut in and terrible. She crossed herself
      quickly three times and said:
    

      “Give him peace, O Lord . . . give him peace. . . .”
    

      And she began crying.
    

      “Vanya,” she called. “Ivan Andreitch!”
    

      There was no answer. Thinking that Laevsky had come in and was standing
      behind her chair, she sobbed like a child, and said:
    

      “Why did you not tell me before that he was dead? I wouldn’t
      have gone to the picnic; I shouldn’t have laughed so horribly. . . .
      The men said horrid things to me. What a sin, what a sin! Save me, Vanya,
      save me. . . . I have been mad. . . . I am lost. . . .”
    

      Laevsky heard her sobs. He felt stifled and his heart was beating
      violently. In his misery he got up, stood in the middle of the room,
      groped his way in the dark to an easy-chair by the table, and sat down.
    

      “This is a prison . . .” he thought. “I must get away .
      . . I can’t bear it.”
    

      It was too late to go and play cards; there were no restaurants in the
      town. He lay down again and covered his ears that he might not hear her
      sobbing, and he suddenly remembered that he could go to Samoylenko. To
      avoid going near Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, he got out of the window into the
      garden, climbed over the garden fence and went along the street. It was
      dark. A steamer, judging by its lights, a big passenger one, had just come
      in. He heard the clank of the anchor chain. A red light was moving rapidly
      from the shore in the direction of the steamer: it was the Customs boat
      going out to it.
    

      “The passengers are asleep in their cabins . . .” thought
      Laevsky, and he envied the peace of mind of other people.
    

      The windows in Samoylenko’s house were open. Laevsky looked in at
      one of them, then in at another; it was dark and still in the rooms.
    

      “Alexandr Daviditch, are you asleep?” he called. “Alexandr
      Daviditch!”
    

      He heard a cough and an uneasy shout:
    

      “Who’s there? What the devil?”
    

      “It is I, Alexandr Daviditch; excuse me.”
    

      A little later the door opened; there was a glow of soft light from the
      lamp, and Samoylenko’s huge figure appeared all in white, with a
      white nightcap on his head.
    

      “What now?” he asked, scratching himself and breathing hard
      from sleepiness. “Wait a minute; I’ll open the door directly.”
    

      “Don’t trouble; I’ll get in at the window. . . .”
    

      Laevsky climbed in at the window, and when he reached Samoylenko, seized
      him by the hand.
    

      “Alexandr Daviditch,” he said in a shaking voice, “save
      me! I beseech you, I implore you. Understand me! My position is agonising.
      If it goes on for another two days I shall strangle myself like . . . like
      a dog.”
    

      “Wait a bit. . . . What are you talking about exactly?”
    

      “Light a candle.”
    

      “Oh . . . oh! . . .” sighed Samoylenko, lighting a candle.
      “My God! My God! . . . Why, it’s past one, brother.”
    

      “Excuse me, but I can’t stay at home,” said Laevsky,
      feeling great comfort from the light and the presence of Samoylenko.
      “You are my best, my only friend, Alexandr Daviditch. . . . You are
      my only hope. For God’s sake, come to my rescue, whether you want to
      or not. I must get away from here, come what may! . . . Lend me the money!”
    

      “Oh, my God, my God! . . .” sighed Samoylenko, scratching
      himself. “I was dropping asleep and I hear the whistle of the
      steamer, and now you . . . Do you want much?”
    

      “Three hundred roubles at least. I must leave her a hundred, and I
      need two hundred for the journey. . . . I owe you about four hundred
      already, but I will send it you all . . . all. . . .”
    

      Samoylenko took hold of both his whiskers in one hand, and standing with
      his legs wide apart, pondered.
    

      “Yes . . .” he muttered, musing. “Three hundred. . . .
      Yes. . . . But I haven’t got so much. I shall have to borrow it from
      some one.”
    

      “Borrow it, for God’s sake!” said Laevsky, seeing from
      Samoylenko’s face that he wanted to lend him the money and certainly
      would lend it. “Borrow it, and I’ll be sure to pay you back. I
      will send it from Petersburg as soon as I get there. You can set your mind
      at rest about that. I’ll tell you what, Sasha,” he said,
      growing more animated; “let us have some wine.”
    

      “Yes . . . we can have some wine, too.”
    

      They both went into the dining-room.
    

      “And how about Nadyezhda Fyodorovna?” asked Samoylenko,
      setting three bottles and a plate of peaches on the table. “Surely
      she’s not remaining?”
    

      “I will arrange it all, I will arrange it all,” said Laevsky,
      feeling an unexpected rush of joy. “I will send her the money
      afterwards and she will join me. . . . Then we will define our relations.
      To your health, friend.”
    

      “Wait a bit,” said Samoylenko. “Drink this first. . . .
      This is from my vineyard. This bottle is from Navaridze’s vineyard
      and this one is from Ahatulov’s. . . . Try all three kinds and tell
      me candidly. . . . There seems a little acidity about mine. Eh? Don’t
      you taste it?”
    

      “Yes. You have comforted me, Alexandr Daviditch. Thank you. . . . I
      feel better.”
    

      “Is there any acidity?”
    

      “Goodness only knows, I don’t know. But you are a splendid,
      wonderful man!”
    

      Looking at his pale, excited, good-natured face, Samoylenko remembered Von
      Koren’s view that men like that ought to be destroyed, and Laevsky
      seemed to him a weak, defenceless child, whom any one could injure and
      destroy.
    

      “And when you go, make it up with your mother,” he said.
      “It’s not right.”
    

      “Yes, yes; I certainly shall.”
    

      They were silent for a while. When they had emptied the first bottle,
      Samoylenko said:
    

      “You ought to make it up with Von Koren too. You are both such
      splendid, clever fellows, and you glare at each other like wolves.”
    

      “Yes, he’s a fine, very intelligent fellow,” Laevsky
      assented, ready now to praise and forgive every one. “He’s a
      remarkable man, but it’s impossible for me to get on with him. No!
      Our natures are too different. I’m an indolent, weak, submissive
      nature. Perhaps in a good minute I might hold out my hand to him, but he
      would turn away from me . . . with contempt.”
    

      Laevsky took a sip of wine, walked from corner to corner and went on,
      standing in the middle of the room:
    

      “I understand Von Koren very well. His is a resolute, strong,
      despotic nature. You have heard him continually talking of ‘the
      expedition,’ and it’s not mere talk. He wants the wilderness,
      the moonlit night: all around in little tents, under the open sky, lie
      sleeping his sick and hungry Cossacks, guides, porters, doctor, priest,
      all exhausted with their weary marches, while only he is awake, sitting
      like Stanley on a camp-stool, feeling himself the monarch of the desert
      and the master of these men. He goes on and on and on, his men groan and
      die, one after another, and he goes on and on, and in the end perishes
      himself, but still is monarch and ruler of the desert, since the cross
      upon his tomb can be seen by the caravans for thirty or forty miles over
      the desert. I am sorry the man is not in the army. He would have made a
      splendid military genius. He would not have hesitated to drown his cavalry
      in the river and make a bridge out of dead bodies. And such hardihood is
      more needed in war than any kind of fortification or strategy. Oh, I
      understand him perfectly! Tell me: why is he wasting his substance here?
      What does he want here?”
    

      “He is studying the marine fauna.”
    

      “No, no, brother, no!” Laevsky sighed. “A scientific man
      who was on the steamer told me the Black Sea was poor in animal life, and
      that in its depths, thanks to the abundance of sulphuric hydrogen, organic
      life was impossible. All the serious zoologists work at the biological
      station at Naples or Villefranche. But Von Koren is independent and
      obstinate: he works on the Black Sea because nobody else is working there;
      he is at loggerheads with the university, does not care to know his
      comrades and other scientific men because he is first of all a despot and
      only secondly a zoologist. And you’ll see he’ll do something.
      He is already dreaming that when he comes back from his expedition he will
      purify our universities from intrigue and mediocrity, and will make the
      scientific men mind their p’s and q’s. Despotism is just as
      strong in science as in the army. And he is spending his second summer in
      this stinking little town because he would rather be first in a village
      than second in a town. Here he is a king and an eagle; he keeps all the
      inhabitants under his thumb and oppresses them with his authority. He has
      appropriated every one, he meddles in other people’s affairs;
      everything is of use to him, and every one is afraid of him. I am slipping
      out of his clutches, he feels that and hates me. Hasn’t he told you
      that I ought to be destroyed or sent to hard labour?”
    

      “Yes,” laughed Samoylenko.
    

      Laevsky laughed too, and drank some wine.
    

      “His ideals are despotic too,” he said, laughing, and biting a
      peach. “Ordinary mortals think of their neighbour—me, you, man
      in fact—if they work for the common weal. To Von Koren men are
      puppets and nonentities, too trivial to be the object of his life. He
      works, will go for his expedition and break his neck there, not for the
      sake of love for his neighbour, but for the sake of such abstractions as
      humanity, future generations, an ideal race of men. He exerts himself for
      the improvement of the human race, and we are in his eyes only slaves,
      food for the cannon, beasts of burden; some he would destroy or stow away
      in Siberia, others he would break by discipline, would, like Araktcheev,
      force them to get up and go to bed to the sound of the drum; would appoint
      eunuchs to preserve our chastity and morality, would order them to fire at
      any one who steps out of the circle of our narrow conservative morality;
      and all this in the name of the improvement of the human race. . . . And
      what is the human race? Illusion, mirage . . . despots have always been
      illusionists. I understand him very well, brother. I appreciate him and
      don’t deny his importance; this world rests on men like him, and if
      the world were left only to such men as us, for all our good-nature and
      good intentions, we should make as great a mess of it as the flies have of
      that picture. Yes.”
    

      Laevsky sat down beside Samoylenko, and said with genuine feeling: “I’m
      a foolish, worthless, depraved man. The air I breathe, this wine, love,
      life in fact—for all that, I have given nothing in exchange so far
      but lying, idleness, and cowardice. Till now I have deceived myself and
      other people; I have been miserable about it, and my misery was cheap and
      common. I bow my back humbly before Von Koren’s hatred because at
      times I hate and despise myself.”
    

      Laevsky began again pacing from one end of the room to the other in
      excitement, and said:
    

      “I’m glad I see my faults clearly and am conscious of them.
      That will help me to reform and become a different man. My dear fellow, if
      only you knew how passionately, with what anguish, I long for such a
      change. And I swear to you I’ll be a man! I will! I don’t know
      whether it is the wine that is speaking in me, or whether it really is so,
      but it seems to me that it is long since I have spent such pure and lucid
      moments as I have just now with you.”
    

      “It’s time to sleep, brother,” said Samoylenko.
    

      “Yes, yes. . . . Excuse me; I’ll go directly.”
    

      Laevsky moved hurriedly about the furniture and windows, looking for his
      cap.
    

      “Thank you,” he muttered, sighing. “Thank you. . . .
      Kind and friendly words are better than charity. You have given me new
      life.”
    

      He found his cap, stopped, and looked guiltily at Samoylenko.
    

      “Alexandr Daviditch,” he said in an imploring voice.
    

      “What is it?”
    

      “Let me stay the night with you, my dear fellow!”
    

      “Certainly. . . . Why not?”
    

      Laevsky lay down on the sofa, and went on talking to the doctor for a long
      time.
    

      X
    

      Three days after the picnic, Marya Konstantinovna unexpectedly called on
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and without greeting her or taking off her hat,
      seized her by both hands, pressed them to her breast and said in great
      excitement:
    

      “My dear, I am deeply touched and moved: our dear kind-hearted
      doctor told my Nikodim Alexandritch yesterday that your husband was dead.
      Tell me, my dear . . . tell me, is it true?”
    

      “Yes, it’s true; he is dead,” answered Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna.
    

      “That is awful, awful, my dear! But there’s no evil without
      some compensation; your husband was no doubt a noble, wonderful, holy man,
      and such are more needed in Heaven than on earth.”
    

      Every line and feature in Marya Konstantinovna’s face began
      quivering as though little needles were jumping up and down under her
      skin; she gave an almond-oily smile and said, breathlessly,
      enthusiastically:
    

      “And so you are free, my dear. You can hold your head high now, and
      look people boldly in the face. Henceforth God and man will bless your
      union with Ivan Andreitch. It’s enchanting. I am trembling with joy,
      I can find no words. My dear, I will give you away. . . . Nikodim
      Alexandritch and I have been so fond of you, you will allow us to give our
      blessing to your pure, lawful union. When, when do you think of being
      married?”
    

      “I haven’t thought of it,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      freeing her hands.
    

      “That’s impossible, my dear. You have thought of it, you have.”
    

      “Upon my word, I haven’t,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      laughing. “What should we be married for? I see no necessity for it.
      We’ll go on living as we have lived.”
    

      “What are you saying!” cried Marya Konstantinovna in horror.
      “For God’s sake, what are you saying!”
    

      “Our getting married won’t make things any better. On the
      contrary, it will make them even worse. We shall lose our freedom.”
    

      “My dear, my dear, what are you saying!” exclaimed Marya
      Konstantinovna, stepping back and flinging up her hands. “You are
      talking wildly! Think what you are saying. You must settle down!”
    

      “‘Settle down.’ How do you mean? I have not lived yet,
      and you tell me to settle down.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna reflected that she really had not lived. She had
      finished her studies in a boarding-school and had been married to a man
      she did not love; then she had thrown in her lot with Laevsky, and had
      spent all her time with him on this empty, desolate coast, always
      expecting something better. Was that life?
    

      “I ought to be married though,” she thought, but remembering
      Kirilin and Atchmianov she flushed and said:
    

      “No, it’s impossible. Even if Ivan Andreitch begged me to on
      his knees—even then I would refuse.”
    

      Marya Konstantinovna sat on the sofa for a minute in silence, grave and
      mournful, gazing fixedly into space; then she got up and said coldly:
    

      “Good-bye, my dear! Forgive me for having troubled you. Though it’s
      not easy for me, it’s my duty to tell you that from this day all is
      over between us, and, in spite of my profound respect for Ivan Andreitch,
      the door of my house is closed to you henceforth.”
    

      She uttered these words with great solemnity and was herself overwhelmed
      by her solemn tone. Her face began quivering again; it assumed a soft
      almond-oily expression. She held out both hands to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      who was overcome with alarm and confusion, and said in an imploring voice:
    

      “My dear, allow me if only for a moment to be a mother or an elder
      sister to you! I will be as frank with you as a mother.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna felt in her bosom warmth, gladness, and pity for
      herself, as though her own mother had really risen up and were standing
      before her. She impulsively embraced Marya Konstantinovna and pressed her
      face to her shoulder. Both of them shed tears. They sat down on the sofa
      and for a few minutes sobbed without looking at one another or being able
      to utter a word.
    

      “My dear child,” began Marya Konstantinovna, “I will
      tell you some harsh truths, without sparing you.”
    

      “For God’s sake, for God’s sake, do!”
    

      “Trust me, my dear. You remember of all the ladies here, I was the
      only one to receive you. You horrified me from the very first day, but I
      had not the heart to treat you with disdain like all the rest. I grieved
      over dear, good Ivan Andreitch as though he were my son —a young man
      in a strange place, inexperienced, weak, with no mother; and I was
      worried, dreadfully worried. . . . My husband was opposed to our making
      his acquaintance, but I talked him over . . . persuaded him. . . . We
      began receiving Ivan Andreitch, and with him, of course, you. If we had
      not, he would have been insulted. I have a daughter, a son. . . . You
      understand the tender mind, the pure heart of childhood . . . ‘who
      so offendeth one of these little ones.’ . . . I received you into my
      house and trembled for my children. Oh, when you become a mother, you will
      understand my fears. And every one was surprised at my receiving you,
      excuse my saying so, as a respectable woman, and hinted to me . . . well,
      of course, slanders, suppositions. . . . At the bottom of my heart I
      blamed you, but you were unhappy, flighty, to be pitied, and my heart was
      wrung with pity for you.”
    

      “But why, why?” asked Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, trembling all
      over. “What harm have I done any one?”
    

      “You are a terrible sinner. You broke the vow you made your husband
      at the altar. You seduced a fine young man, who perhaps had he not met you
      might have taken a lawful partner for life from a good family in his own
      circle, and would have been like every one else now. You have ruined his
      youth. Don’t speak, don’t speak, my dear! I never believe that
      man is to blame for our sins. It is always the woman’s fault. Men
      are frivolous in domestic life; they are guided by their minds, and not by
      their hearts. There’s a great deal they don’t understand;
      woman understands it all. Everything depends on her. To her much is given
      and from her much will be required. Oh, my dear, if she had been more
      foolish or weaker than man on that side, God would not have entrusted her
      with the education of boys and girls. And then, my dear, you entered on
      the path of vice, forgetting all modesty; any other woman in your place
      would have hidden herself from people, would have sat shut up at home, and
      would only have been seen in the temple of God, pale, dressed all in black
      and weeping, and every one would have said in genuine compassion: ‘O
      Lord, this erring angel is coming back again to Thee . . . .’ But
      you, my dear, have forgotten all discretion; have lived openly,
      extravagantly; have seemed to be proud of your sin; you have been gay and
      laughing, and I, looking at you, shuddered with horror, and have been
      afraid that thunder from Heaven would strike our house while you were
      sitting with us. My dear, don’t speak, don’t speak,”
      cried Marya Konstantinovna, observing that Nadyezhda Fyodorovna wanted to
      speak. “Trust me, I will not deceive you, I will not hide one truth
      from the eyes of your soul. Listen to me, my dear. . . . God marks great
      sinners, and you have been marked-out: only think—your costumes have
      always been appalling.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, who had always had the highest opinion of her
      costumes, left off crying and looked at her with surprise.
    

      “Yes, appalling,” Marya Konstantinovna went on. “Any one
      could judge of your behaviour from the elaboration and gaudiness of your
      attire. People laughed and shrugged their shoulders as they looked at you,
      and I grieved, I grieved. . . . And forgive me, my dear; you are not nice
      in your person! When we met in the bathing-place, you made me tremble.
      Your outer clothing was decent enough, but your petticoat, your chemise. .
      . . My dear, I blushed! Poor Ivan Andreitch! No one ever ties his cravat
      properly, and from his linen and his boots, poor fellow! one can see he
      has no one at home to look after him. And he is always hungry, my darling,
      and of course, if there is no one at home to think of the samovar and the
      coffee, one is forced to spend half one’s salary at the pavilion.
      And it’s simply awful, awful in your home! No one else in the town
      has flies, but there’s no getting rid of them in your rooms: all the
      plates and dishes are black with them. If you look at the windows and the
      chairs, there’s nothing but dust, dead flies, and glasses. . . .
      What do you want glasses standing about for? And, my dear, the table’s
      not cleared till this time in the day. And one’s ashamed to go into
      your bedroom: underclothes flung about everywhere, india-rubber tubes
      hanging on the walls, pails and basins standing about. . . . My dear! A
      husband ought to know nothing, and his wife ought to be as neat as a
      little angel in his presence. I wake up every morning before it is light,
      and wash my face with cold water that my Nikodim Alexandritch may not see
      me looking drowsy.”
    

      “That’s all nonsense,” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna sobbed.
      “If only I were happy, but I am so unhappy!”
    

      “Yes, yes; you are very unhappy!” Marya Konstantinovna sighed,
      hardly able to restrain herself from weeping. “And there’s
      terrible grief in store for you in the future! A solitary old age,
      ill-health; and then you will have to answer at the dread judgment seat. .
      . It’s awful, awful. Now fate itself holds out to you a helping
      hand, and you madly thrust it from you. Be married, make haste and be
      married!”
    

      “Yes, we must, we must,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna; “but
      it’s impossible!”
    

      “Why?”
    

      “It’s impossible. Oh, if only you knew!”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna had an impulse to tell her about Kirilin, and how the
      evening before she had met handsome young Atchmianov at the harbour, and
      how the mad, ridiculous idea had occurred to her of cancelling her debt
      for three hundred; it had amused her very much, and she returned home late
      in the evening feeling that she had sold herself and was irrevocably lost.
      She did not know herself how it had happened. And she longed to swear to
      Marya Konstantinovna that she would certainly pay that debt, but sobs and
      shame prevented her from speaking.
    

      “I am going away,” she said. “Ivan Andreitch may stay,
      but I am going.”
    

      “Where?”
    

      “To Russia.”
    

      “But how will you live there? Why, you have nothing.”
    

      “I will do translation, or . . . or I will open a library . . . .”
    

      “Don’t let your fancy run away with you, my dear. You must
      have money for a library. Well, I will leave you now, and you calm
      yourself and think things over, and to-morrow come and see me, bright and
      happy. That will be enchanting! Well, good-bye, my angel. Let me kiss you.”
    

      Marya Konstantinovna kissed Nadyezhda Fyodorovna on the forehead, made the
      sign of the cross over her, and softly withdrew. It was getting dark, and
      Olga lighted up in the kitchen. Still crying, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna went
      into the bedroom and lay down on the bed. She began to be very feverish.
      She undressed without getting up, crumpled up her clothes at her feet, and
      curled herself up under the bedclothes. She was thirsty, and there was no
      one to give her something to drink.
    

      “I’ll pay it back!” she said to herself, and it seemed
      to her in delirium that she was sitting beside some sick woman, and
      recognised her as herself. “I’ll pay it back. It would be
      stupid to imagine that it was for money I . . . I will go away and send
      him the money from Petersburg. At first a hundred . . . then another
      hundred . . . and then the third hundred. . . .”
    

      It was late at night when Laevsky came in.
    

      “At first a hundred . . .” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna said to him,
      “then another hundred . . .”
    

      “You ought to take some quinine,” he said, and thought,
      “To-morrow is Wednesday; the steamer goes and I am not going in it.
      So I shall have to go on living here till Saturday.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna knelt up in bed.
    

      “I didn’t say anything just now, did I?” she asked,
      smiling and screwing up her eyes at the light.
    

      “No, nothing. We shall have to send for the doctor to-morrow
      morning. Go to sleep.”
    

      He took his pillow and went to the door. Ever since he had finally made up
      his mind to go away and leave Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, she had begun to raise
      in him pity and a sense of guilt; he felt a little ashamed in her
      presence, as though in the presence of a sick or old horse whom one has
      decided to kill. He stopped in the doorway and looked round at her.
    

      “I was out of humour at the picnic and said something rude to you.
      Forgive me, for God’s sake!”
    

      Saying this, he went off to his study, lay down, and for a long while
      could not get to sleep.
    

      Next morning when Samoylenko, attired, as it was a holiday, in full-dress
      uniform with epaulettes on his shoulders and decorations on his breast,
      came out of the bedroom after feeling Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s pulse
      and looking at her tongue, Laevsky, who was standing in the doorway, asked
      him anxiously: “Well? Well?”
    

      There was an expression of terror, of extreme uneasiness, and of hope on
      his face.
    

      “Don’t worry yourself; there’s nothing dangerous,”
      said Samoylenko; “it’s the usual fever.”
    

      “I don’t mean that.” Laevsky frowned impatiently.
      “Have you got the money?”
    

      “My dear soul, forgive me,” he whispered, looking round at the
      door and overcome with confusion.
    

      “For God’s sake, forgive me! No one has anything to spare, and
      I’ve only been able to collect by five- and by ten-rouble notes. . .
      . Only a hundred and ten in all. To-day I’ll speak to some one else.
      Have patience.”
    

      “But Saturday is the latest date,” whispered Laevsky,
      trembling with impatience. “By all that’s sacred, get it by
      Saturday! If I don’t get away by Saturday, nothing’s any use,
      nothing! I can’t understand how a doctor can be without money!”
    

      “Lord have mercy on us!” Samoylenko whispered rapidly and
      intensely, and there was positively a breaking note in his throat. “I’ve
      been stripped of everything; I am owed seven thousand, and I’m in
      debt all round. Is it my fault?”
    

      “Then you’ll get it by Saturday? Yes?”
    

      “I’ll try.”
    

      “I implore you, my dear fellow! So that the money may be in my hands
      by Friday morning!”
    

      Samoylenko sat down and prescribed solution of quinine and kalii bromati
      and tincture of rhubarb, tincturÃ¦ gentianÃ¦, aquÃ¦ foeniculi —all in
      one mixture, added some pink syrup to sweeten it, and went away.
    

      XI
    

      “You look as though you were coming to arrest me,” said Von
      Koren, seeing Samoylenko coming in, in his full-dress uniform.
    

      “I was passing by and thought: ‘Suppose I go in and pay my
      respects to zoology,’” said Samoylenko, sitting down at the
      big table, knocked together by the zoologist himself out of plain boards.
      “Good-morning, holy father,” he said to the deacon, who was
      sitting in the window, copying something. “I’ll stay a minute
      and then run home to see about dinner. It’s time. . . . I’m
      not hindering you?”
    

      “Not in the least,” answered the zoologist, laying out over
      the table slips of paper covered with small writing. “We are busy
      copying.”
    

      “Ah! . . . Oh, my goodness, my goodness! . . .” sighed
      Samoylenko. He cautiously took up from the table a dusty book on which
      there was lying a dead dried spider, and said: “Only fancy, though;
      some little green beetle is going about its business, when suddenly a
      monster like this swoops down upon it. I can fancy its terror.”
    

      “Yes, I suppose so.”
    

      “Is poison given it to protect it from its enemies?”
    

      “Yes, to protect it and enable it to attack.”
    

      “To be sure, to be sure. . . . And everything in nature, my dear
      fellows, is consistent and can be explained,” sighed Samoylenko;
      “only I tell you what I don’t understand. You’re a man
      of very great intellect, so explain it to me, please. There are, you know,
      little beasts no bigger than rats, rather handsome to look at, but nasty
      and immoral in the extreme, let me tell you. Suppose such a little beast
      is running in the woods. He sees a bird; he catches it and devours it. He
      goes on and sees in the grass a nest of eggs; he does not want to eat them—he
      is not hungry, but yet he tastes one egg and scatters the others out of
      the nest with his paw. Then he meets a frog and begins to play with it;
      when he has tormented the frog he goes on licking himself and meets a
      beetle; he crushes the beetle with his paw . . . and so he spoils and
      destroys everything on his way. . . . He creeps into other beasts’
      holes, tears up the anthills, cracks the snail’s shell. If he meets
      a rat, he fights with it; if he meets a snake or a mouse, he must strangle
      it; and so the whole day long. Come, tell me: what is the use of a beast
      like that? Why was he created?”
    

      “I don’t know what animal you are talking of,” said Von
      Koren; “most likely one of the insectivora. Well, he got hold of the
      bird because it was incautious; he broke the nest of eggs because the bird
      was not skilful, had made the nest badly and did not know how to conceal
      it. The frog probably had some defect in its colouring or he would not
      have seen it, and so on. Your little beast only destroys the weak, the
      unskilful, the careless—in fact, those who have defects which nature
      does not think fit to hand on to posterity. Only the cleverer, the
      stronger, the more careful and developed survive; and so your little
      beast, without suspecting it, is serving the great ends of perfecting
      creation.”
    

      “Yes, yes, yes. . . . By the way, brother,” said Samoylenko
      carelessly, “lend me a hundred roubles.”
    

      “Very good. There are some very interesting types among the
      insectivorous mammals. For instance, the mole is said to be useful because
      he devours noxious insects. There is a story that some German sent William
      I. a fur coat made of moleskins, and the Emperor ordered him to be
      reproved for having destroyed so great a number of useful animals. And yet
      the mole is not a bit less cruel than your little beast, and is very
      mischievous besides, as he spoils meadows terribly.”
    

      Von Koren opened a box and took out a hundred-rouble note.
    

      “The mole has a powerful thorax, just like the bat,” he went
      on, shutting the box; “the bones and muscles are tremendously
      developed, the mouth is extraordinarily powerfully furnished. If it had
      the proportions of an elephant, it would be an all-destructive, invincible
      animal. It is interesting when two moles meet underground; they begin at
      once as though by agreement digging a little platform; they need the
      platform in order to have a battle more conveniently. When they have made
      it they enter upon a ferocious struggle and fight till the weaker one
      falls. Take the hundred roubles,” said Von Koren, dropping his
      voice, “but only on condition that you’re not borrowing it for
      Laevsky.”
    

      “And if it were for Laevsky,” cried Samoylenko, flaring up,
      “what is that to you?”
    

      “I can’t give it to you for Laevsky. I know you like lending
      people money. You would give it to Kerim, the brigand, if he were to ask
      you; but, excuse me, I can’t assist you in that direction.”
    

      “Yes, it is for Laevsky I am asking it,” said Samoylenko,
      standing up and waving his right arm. “Yes! For Laevsky! And no one,
      fiend or devil, has a right to dictate to me how to dispose of my own
      money. It doesn’t suit you to lend it me? No?”
    

      The deacon began laughing.
    

      “Don’t get excited, but be reasonable,” said the
      zoologist. “To shower benefits on Mr. Laevsky is, to my thinking, as
      senseless as to water weeds or to feed locusts.”
    

      “To my thinking, it is our duty to help our neighbours!” cried
      Samoylenko.
    

      “In that case, help that hungry Turk who is lying under the fence!
      He is a workman and more useful and indispensable than your Laevsky. Give
      him that hundred-rouble note! Or subscribe a hundred roubles to my
      expedition!”
    

      “Will you give me the money or not? I ask you!”
    

      “Tell me openly: what does he want money for?”
    

      “It’s not a secret; he wants to go to Petersburg on Saturday.”
    

      “So that is it!” Von Koren drawled out. “Aha! . . . We
      understand. And is she going with him, or how is it to be?”
    

      “She’s staying here for the time. He’ll arrange his
      affairs in Petersburg and send her the money, and then she’ll go.”
    

      “That’s smart!” said the zoologist, and he gave a short
      tenor laugh. “Smart, well planned.”
    

      He went rapidly up to Samoylenko, and standing face to face with him, and
      looking him in the eyes, asked: “Tell me now honestly: is he tired
      of her? Yes? tell me: is he tired of her? Yes?”
    

      “Yes,” Samoylenko articulated, beginning to perspire.
    

      “How repulsive it is!” said Von Koren, and from his face it
      could be seen that he felt repulsion. “One of two things, Alexandr
      Daviditch: either you are in the plot with him, or, excuse my saying so,
      you are a simpleton. Surely you must see that he is taking you in like a
      child in the most shameless way? Why, it’s as clear as day that he
      wants to get rid of her and abandon her here. She’ll be left a
      burden on you. It is as clear as day that you will have to send her to
      Petersburg at your expense. Surely your fine friend can’t have so
      blinded you by his dazzling qualities that you can’t see the
      simplest thing?”
    

      “That’s all supposition,” said Samoylenko, sitting down.
    

      “Supposition? But why is he going alone instead of taking her with
      him? And ask him why he doesn’t send her off first. The sly beast!”
    

      Overcome with sudden doubts and suspicions about his friend, Samoylenko
      weakened and took a humbler tone.
    

      “But it’s impossible,” he said, recalling the night
      Laevsky had spent at his house. “He is so unhappy!”
    

      “What of that? Thieves and incendiaries are unhappy too!”
    

      “Even supposing you are right . . .” said Samoylenko,
      hesitating. “Let us admit it. . . . Still, he’s a young man in
      a strange place . . . a student. We have been students, too, and there is
      no one but us to come to his assistance.”
    

      “To help him to do abominable things, because he and you at
      different times have been at universities, and neither of you did anything
      there! What nonsense!”
    

      “Stop; let us talk it over coolly. I imagine it will be possible to
      make some arrangement. . . .” Samoylenko reflected, twiddling his
      fingers. “I’ll give him the money, you see, but make him
      promise on his honour that within a week he’ll send Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna the money for the journey.”
    

      “And he’ll give you his word of honour—in fact, he’ll
      shed tears and believe in it himself; but what’s his word of honour
      worth? He won’t keep it, and when in a year or two you meet him on
      the Nevsky Prospect with a new mistress on his arm, he’ll excuse
      himself on the ground that he has been crippled by civilisation, and that
      he is made after the pattern of Rudin. Drop him, for God’s sake!
      Keep away from the filth; don’t stir it up with both hands!”
    

      Samoylenko thought for a minute and said resolutely:
    

      “But I shall give him the money all the same. As you please. I can’t
      bring myself to refuse a man simply on an assumption.”
    

      “Very fine, too. You can kiss him if you like.”
    

      “Give me the hundred roubles, then,” Samoylenko asked timidly.
    

      “I won’t.”
    

      A silence followed. Samoylenko was quite crushed; his face wore a guilty,
      abashed, and ingratiating expression, and it was strange to see this
      pitiful, childish, shamefaced countenance on a huge man wearing epaulettes
      and orders of merit.
    

      “The bishop here goes the round of his diocese on horseback instead
      of in a carriage,” said the deacon, laying down his pen. “It’s
      extremely touching to see him sit on his horse. His simplicity and
      humility are full of Biblical grandeur.”
    

      “Is he a good man?” asked Von Koren, who was glad to change
      the conversation.
    

      “Of course! If he hadn’t been a good man, do you suppose he
      would have been consecrated a bishop?”
    

      “Among the bishops are to be found good and gifted men,” said
      Von Koren. “The only drawback is that some of them have the weakness
      to imagine themselves statesmen. One busies himself with Russification,
      another criticises the sciences. That’s not their business. They had
      much better look into their consistory a little.”
    

      “A layman cannot judge of bishops.”
    

      “Why so, deacon? A bishop is a man just the same as you or I.”
    

      “The same, but not the same.” The deacon was offended and took
      up his pen. “If you had been the same, the Divine Grace would have
      rested upon you, and you would have been bishop yourself; and since you
      are not bishop, it follows you are not the same.”
    

      “Don’t talk nonsense, deacon,” said Samoylenko
      dejectedly. “Listen to what I suggest,” he said, turning to
      Von Koren. “Don’t give me that hundred roubles. You’ll
      be having your dinners with me for three months before the winter, so let
      me have the money beforehand for three months.”
    

      “I won’t.”
    

      Samoylenko bGlinked and turned crimson; he mechanically drew towards him
      the book with the spider on it and looked at it, then he got up and took
      his hat.
    

      Von Koren felt sorry for him.
    

      “What it is to have to live and do with people like this,”
      said the zoologist, and he kicked a paper into the corner with
      indignation. “You must understand that this is not kindness, it is
      not love, but cowardice, slackness, poison! What’s gained by reason
      is lost by your flabby good-for-nothing hearts! When I was ill with
      typhoid as a schoolboy, my aunt in her sympathy gave me pickled mushrooms
      to eat, and I very nearly died. You, and my aunt too, must understand that
      love for man is not to be found in the heart or the stomach or the bowels,
      but here!”
    

      Von Koren slapped himself on the forehead.
    

      “Take it,” he said, and thrust a hundred-rouble note into his
      hand.
    

      “You’ve no need to be angry, Kolya,” said Samoylenko
      mildly, folding up the note. “I quite understand you, but . . . you
      must put yourself in my place.”
    

      “You are an old woman, that’s what you are.”
    

      The deacon burst out laughing.
    

      “Hear my last request, Alexandr Daviditch,” said Von Koren
      hotly. “When you give that scoundrel the money, make it a condition
      that he takes his lady with him, or sends her on ahead, and don’t
      give it him without. There’s no need to stand on ceremony with him.
      Tell him so, or, if you don’t, I give you my word I’ll go to
      his office and kick him downstairs, and I’ll break off all
      acquaintance with you. So you’d better know it.”
    

      “Well! To go with her or send her on beforehand will be more
      convenient for him,” said Samoylenko. “He’ll be
      delighted indeed. Well, goodbye.”
    

      He said good-bye affectionately and went out, but before shutting the door
      after him, he looked round at Von Koren and, with a ferocious face, said:
    

      “It’s the Germans who have ruined you, brother! Yes! The
      Germans!”
    

      XII
    

      Next day, Thursday, Marya Konstantinovna was celebrating the birthday of
      her Kostya. All were invited to come at midday and eat pies, and in the
      evening to drink chocolate. When Laevsky and Nadyezhda Fyodorovna arrived
      in the evening, the zoologist, who was already sitting in the
      drawing-room, drinking chocolate, asked Samoylenko:
    

      “Have you talked to him?”
    

      “Not yet.”
    

      “Mind now, don’t stand on ceremony. I can’t understand
      the insolence of these people! Why, they know perfectly well the view
      taken by this family of their cohabitation, and yet they force themselves
      in here.”
    

      “If one is to pay attention to every prejudice,” said
      Samoylenko, “one could go nowhere.”
    

      “Do you mean to say that the repugnance felt by the masses for
      illicit love and moral laxity is a prejudice?”
    

      “Of course it is. It’s prejudice and hate. When the soldiers
      see a girl of light behaviour, they laugh and whistle; but just ask them
      what they are themselves.”
    

      “It’s not for nothing they whistle. The fact that girls
      strangle their illegitimate children and go to prison for it, and that
      Anna Karenin flung herself under the train, and that in the villages they
      smear the gates with tar, and that you and I, without knowing why, are
      pleased by Katya’s purity, and that every one of us feels a vague
      craving for pure love, though he knows there is no such love—is all
      that prejudice? That is the one thing, brother, which has survived intact
      from natural selection, and, if it were not for that obscure force
      regulating the relations of the sexes, the Laevskys would have it all
      their own way, and mankind would degenerate in two years.”
    

      Laevsky came into the drawing-room, greeted every one, and shaking hands
      with Von Koren, smiled ingratiatingly. He waited for a favourable moment
      and said to Samoylenko:
    

      “Excuse me, Alexandr Daviditch, I must say two words to you.”
    

      Samoylenko got up, put his arm round Laevsky’s waist, and both of
      them went into Nikodim Alexandritch’s study.
    

      “To-morrow’s Friday,” said Laevsky, biting his nails.
      “Have you got what you promised?”
    

      “I’ve only got two hundred. I’ll get the rest to-day or
      to-morrow. Don’t worry yourself.”
    

      “Thank God . . .” sighed Laevsky, and his hands began
      trembling with joy. “You are saving me, Alexandr Daviditch, and I
      swear to you by God, by my happiness and anything you like, I’ll
      send you the money as soon as I arrive. And I’ll send you my old
      debt too.”
    

      “Look here, Vanya . . .” said Samoylenko, turning crimson and
      taking him by the button. “You must forgive my meddling in your
      private affairs, but . . . why shouldn’t you take Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna with you?”
    

      “You queer fellow. How is that possible? One of us must stay, or our
      creditors will raise an outcry. You see, I owe seven hundred or more to
      the shops. Only wait, and I will send them the money. I’ll stop
      their mouths, and then she can come away.”
    

      “I see. . . . But why shouldn’t you send her on first?”
    

      “My goodness, as though that were possible!” Laevsky was
      horrified. “Why, she’s a woman; what would she do there alone?
      What does she know about it? That would only be a loss of time and a
      useless waste of money.”
    

      “That’s reasonable . . .” thought Samoylenko, but
      remembering his conversation with Von Koren, he looked down and said
      sullenly: “I can’t agree with you. Either go with her or send
      her first; otherwise . . . otherwise I won’t give you the money.
      Those are my last words. . .”
    

      He staggered back, lurched backwards against the door, and went into the
      drawing-room, crimson, and overcome with confusion.
    

      “Friday . . . Friday,” thought Laevsky, going back into the
      drawing-room. “Friday. . . .”
    

      He was handed a cup of chocolate; he burnt his lips and tongue with the
      scalding chocolate and thought: “Friday . . . Friday. . . .”
    

      For some reason he could not get the word “Friday” out of his
      head; he could think of nothing but Friday, and the only thing that was
      clear to him, not in his brain but somewhere in his heart, was that he
      would not get off on Saturday. Before him stood Nikodim Alexandritch, very
      neat, with his hair combed over his temples, saying:
    

      “Please take something to eat. . . .”
    

      Marya Konstantinovna showed the visitors Katya’s school report and
      said, drawling:
    

      “It’s very, very difficult to do well at school nowadays! So
      much is expected . . .”
    

      “Mamma!” groaned Katya, not knowing where to hide her
      confusion at the praises of the company.
    

      Laevsky, too, looked at the report and praised it. Scripture, Russian
      language, conduct, fives and fours, danced before his eyes, and all this,
      mixed with the haunting refrain of “Friday,” with the
      carefully combed locks of Nikodim Alexandritch and the red cheeks of
      Katya, produced on him a sensation of such immense overwhelming boredom
      that he almost shrieked with despair and asked himself: “Is it
      possible, is it possible I shall not get away?”
    

      They put two card tables side by side and sat down to play post. Laevsky
      sat down too.
    

      “Friday . . . Friday . . .” he kept thinking, as he smiled and
      took a pencil out of his pocket. “Friday. . . .”
    

      He wanted to think over his position, and was afraid to think. It was
      terrible to him to realise that the doctor had detected him in the
      deception which he had so long and carefully concealed from himself. Every
      time he thought of his future he would not let his thoughts have full
      rein. He would get into the train and set off, and thereby the problem of
      his life would be solved, and he did not let his thoughts go farther. Like
      a far-away dim light in the fields, the thought sometimes flickered in his
      mind that in one of the side-streets of Petersburg, in the remote future,
      he would have to have recourse to a tiny lie in order to get rid of
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna and pay his debts; he would tell a lie only once, and
      then a completely new life would begin. And that was right: at the price
      of a small lie he would win so much truth.
    

      Now when by his blunt refusal the doctor had crudely hinted at his
      deception, he began to understand that he would need deception not only in
      the remote future, but to-day, and to-morrow, and in a month’s time,
      and perhaps up to the very end of his life. In fact, in order to get away
      he would have to lie to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, to his creditors, and to his
      superiors in the Service; then, in order to get money in Petersburg, he
      would have to lie to his mother, to tell her that he had already broken
      with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna; and his mother would not give him more than
      five hundred roubles, so he had already deceived the doctor, as he would
      not be in a position to pay him back the money within a short time.
      Afterwards, when Nadyezhda Fyodorovna came to Petersburg, he would have to
      resort to a regular series of deceptions, little and big, in order to get
      free of her; and again there would be tears, boredom, a disgusting
      existence, remorse, and so there would be no new life. Deception and
      nothing more. A whole mountain of lies rose before Laevsky’s
      imagination. To leap over it at one bound and not to do his lying
      piecemeal, he would have to bring himself to stern, uncompromising action;
      for instance, to getting up without saying a word, putting on his hat, and
      at once setting off without money and without explanation. But Laevsky
      felt that was impossible for him.
    

      “Friday, Friday . . .” he thought. “Friday. . . .”
    

      They wrote little notes, folded them in two, and put them in Nikodim
      Alexandritch’s old top-hat. When there were a sufficient heap of
      notes, Kostya, who acted the part of postman, walked round the table and
      delivered them. The deacon, Katya, and Kostya, who received amusing notes
      and tried to write as funnily as they could, were highly delighted.
    

      “We must have a little talk,” Nadyezhda Fyodorovna read in a
      little note; she glanced at Marya Konstantinovna, who gave her an
      almond-oily smile and nodded.
    

      “Talk of what?” thought Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. “If one
      can’t tell the whole, it’s no use talking.”
    

      Before going out for the evening she had tied Laevsky’s cravat for
      him, and that simple action filled her soul with tenderness and sorrow.
      The anxiety in his face, his absent-minded looks, his pallor, and the
      incomprehensible change that had taken place in him of late, and the fact
      that she had a terrible revolting secret from him, and the fact that her
      hands trembled when she tied his cravat—all this seemed to tell her
      that they had not long left to be together. She looked at him as though he
      were an ikon, with terror and penitence, and thought: “Forgive,
      forgive.”
    

      Opposite her was sitting Atchmianov, and he never took his black,
      love-sick eyes off her. She was stirred by passion; she was ashamed of
      herself, and afraid that even her misery and sorrow would not prevent her
      from yielding to impure desire to-morrow, if not to-day —and that,
      like a drunkard, she would not have the strength to stop herself.
    

      She made up her mind to go away that she might not continue this life,
      shameful for herself, and humiliating for Laevsky. She would beseech him
      with tears to let her go; and if he opposed her, she would go away
      secretly. She would not tell him what had happened; let him keep a pure
      memory of her.
    

      “I love you, I love you, I love you,” she read. It was from
      Atchmianov.
    

      She would live in some far remote place, would work and send Laevsky,
      “anonymously,” money, embroidered shirts, and tobacco, and
      would return to him only in old age or if he were dangerously ill and
      needed a nurse. When in his old age he learned what were her reasons for
      leaving him and refusing to be his wife, he would appreciate her sacrifice
      and forgive.
    

      “You’ve got a long nose.” That must be from the deacon
      or Kostya.
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna imagined how, parting from Laevsky, she would embrace
      him warmly, would kiss his hand, and would swear to love him all her life,
      all her life, and then, living in obscurity among strangers, she would
      every day think that somewhere she had a friend, some one she loved—a
      pure, noble, lofty man who kept a pure memory of her.
    

      “If you don’t give me an interview to-day, I shall take
      measures, I assure you on my word of honour. You can’t treat decent
      people like this; you must understand that.” That was from Kirilin.
    

      XIII
    

      Laevsky received two notes; he opened one and read: “Don’t go
      away, my darling.”
    

      “Who could have written that?” he thought. “Not
      Samoylenko, of course. And not the deacon, for he doesn’t know I
      want to go away. Von Koren, perhaps?”
    

      The zoologist bent over the table and drew a pyramid. Laevsky fancied that
      his eyes were smiling.
    

      “Most likely Samoylenko . . . has been gossiping,” thought
      Laevsky.
    

      In the other note, in the same disguised angular handwriting with long
      tails to the letters, was written: “Somebody won’t go away on
      Saturday.”
    

      “A stupid gibe,” thought Laevsky. “Friday, Friday. . . .”
    

      Something rose in his throat. He touched his collar and coughed, but
      instead of a cough a laugh broke from his throat.
    

      “Ha-ha-ha!” he laughed. “Ha-ha-ha! What am I laughing
      at? Ha-ha-ha!”
    

      He tried to restrain himself, covered his mouth with his hand, but the
      laugh choked his chest and throat, and his hand could not cover his mouth.
    

      “How stupid it is!” he thought, rolling with laughter. “Have
      I gone out of my mind?”
    

      The laugh grew shriller and shriller, and became something like the bark
      of a lap-dog. Laevsky tried to get up from the table, but his legs would
      not obey him and his right hand was strangely, without his volition,
      dancing on the table, convulsively clutching and crumpling up the bits of
      paper. He saw looks of wonder, Samoylenko’s grave, frightened face,
      and the eyes of the zoologist full of cold irony and disgust, and realised
      that he was in hysterics.
    

      “How hideous, how shameful!” he thought, feeling the warmth of
      tears on his face. “. . . Oh, oh, what a disgrace! It has never
      happened to me. . . .”
    

      They took him under his arms, and supporting his head from behind, led him
      away; a glass gleamed before his eyes and knocked against his teeth, and
      the water was spilt on his breast; he was in a little room, with two beds
      in the middle, side by side, covered by two snow-white quilts. He dropped
      on one of the beds and sobbed.
    

      “It’s nothing, it’s nothing,” Samoylenko kept
      saying; “it does happen . . . it does happen. . . .”
    

      Chill with horror, trembling all over and dreading something awful,
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna stood by the bedside and kept asking:
    

      “What is it? What is it? For God’s sake, tell me.”
    

      “Can Kirilin have written him something?” she thought.
    

      “It’s nothing,” said Laevsky, laughing and crying;
      “go away, darling.”
    

      His face expressed neither hatred nor repulsion: so he knew nothing;
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was somewhat reassured, and she went into the
      drawing-room.
    

      “Don’t agitate yourself, my dear!” said Marya
      Konstantinovna, sitting down beside her and taking her hand. “It
      will pass. Men are just as weak as we poor sinners. You are both going
      through a crisis. . . . One can so well understand it! Well, my dear, I am
      waiting for an answer. Let us have a little talk.”
    

      “No, we are not going to talk,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,
      listening to Laevsky’s sobs. “I feel depressed. . . . You must
      allow me to go home.”
    

      “What do you mean, what do you mean, my dear?” cried Marya
      Konstantinovna in alarm. “Do you think I could let you go without
      supper? We will have something to eat, and then you may go with my
      blessing.”
    

      “I feel miserable . . .” whispered Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and
      she caught at the arm of the chair with both hands to avoid falling.
    

      “He’s got a touch of hysterics,” said Von Koren gaily,
      coming into the drawing-room, but seeing Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, he was
      taken aback and retreated.
    

      When the attack was over, Laevsky sat on the strange bed and thought.
    

      “Disgraceful! I’ve been howling like some wretched girl! I
      must have been absurd and disgusting. I will go away by the back stairs .
      . . . But that would seem as though I took my hysterics too seriously. I
      ought to take it as a joke. . . .”
    

      He looked in the looking-glass, sat there for some time, and went back
      into the drawing-room.
    

      “Here I am,” he said, smiling; he felt agonisingly ashamed,
      and he felt others were ashamed in his presence. “Fancy such a thing
      happening,” he said, sitting down. “I was sitting here, and
      all of a sudden, do you know, I felt a terrible piercing pain in my side .
      . . unendurable, my nerves could not stand it, and . . . and it led to
      this silly performance. This is the age of nerves; there is no help for
      it.”
    

      At supper he drank some wine, and, from time to time, with an abrupt sigh
      rubbed his side as though to suggest that he still felt the pain. And no
      one, except Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, believed him, and he saw that.
    

      After nine o’clock they went for a walk on the boulevard. Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, afraid that Kirilin would speak to her, did her best to keep
      all the time beside Marya Konstantinovna and the children. She felt weak
      with fear and misery, and felt she was going to be feverish; she was
      exhausted and her legs would hardly move, but she did not go home, because
      she felt sure that she would be followed by Kirilin or Atchmianov or both
      at once. Kirilin walked behind her with Nikodim Alexandritch, and kept
      humming in an undertone:
    

      “I don’t al-low people to play with me! I don’t al-low
      it.”
    

      From the boulevard they went back to the pavilion and walked along the
      beach, and looked for a long time at the phosphorescence on the water. Von
      Koren began telling them why it looked phosphorescent.
    

      XIV
    

      “It’s time I went to my vint. . . . They will be
      waiting for me,” said Laevsky. “Good-bye, my friends.”
    

      “I’ll come with you; wait a minute,” said Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, and she took his arm.
    

      They said good-bye to the company and went away. Kirilin took leave too,
      and saying that he was going the same way, went along beside them.
    

      “What will be, will be,” thought Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. “So
      be it. . . .”
    

      And it seemed to her that all the evil memories in her head had taken
      shape and were walking beside her in the darkness, breathing heavily,
      while she, like a fly that had fallen into the inkpot, was crawling
      painfully along the pavement and smirching Laevsky’s side and arm
      with blackness.
    

      If Kirilin should do anything horrid, she thought, not he but she would be
      to blame for it. There was a time when no man would have talked to her as
      Kirilin had done, and she had torn up her security like a thread and
      destroyed it irrevocably—who was to blame for it? Intoxicated by her
      passions she had smiled at a complete stranger, probably just because he
      was tall and a fine figure. After two meetings she was weary of him, had
      thrown him over, and did not that, she thought now, give him the right to
      treat her as he chose?
    

      “Here I’ll say good-bye to you, darling,” said Laevsky.
      “Ilya Mihalitch will see you home.”
    

      He nodded to Kirilin, and, quickly crossing the boulevard, walked along
      the street to Sheshkovsky’s, where there were lights in the windows,
      and then they heard the gate bang as he went in.
    

      “Allow me to have an explanation with you,” said Kirilin.
      “I’m not a boy, not some Atchkasov or Latchkasov, Zatchkasov.
      . . . I demand serious attention.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s heart began beating violently. She made no
      reply.
    

      “The abrupt change in your behaviour to me I put down at first to
      coquetry,” Kirilin went on; “now I see that you don’t
      know how to behave with gentlemanly people. You simply wanted to play with
      me, as you are playing with that wretched Armenian boy; but I’m a
      gentleman and I insist on being treated like a gentleman. And so I am at
      your service. . . .”
    

      “I’m miserable,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna beginning to
      cry, and to hide her tears she turned away.
    

      “I’m miserable too,” said Kirilin, “but what of
      that?”
    

      Kirilin was silent for a space, then he said distinctly and emphatically:
    

      “I repeat, madam, that if you do not give me an interview this
      evening, I’ll make a scandal this very evening.”
    

      “Let me off this evening,” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and she
      did not recognise her own voice, it was so weak and pitiful.
    

      “I must give you a lesson. . . . Excuse me for the roughness of my
      tone, but it’s necessary to give you a lesson. Yes, I regret to say
      I must give you a lesson. I insist on two interviews—to-day and
      to-morrow. After to-morrow you are perfectly free and can go wherever you
      like with any one you choose. To-day and to-morrow.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna went up to her gate and stopped.
    

      “Let me go,” she murmured, trembling all over and seeing
      nothing before her in the darkness but his white tunic. “You’re
      right: I’m a horrible woman. . . . I’m to blame, but let me go
      . . . I beg you.” She touched his cold hand and shuddered. “I
      beseech you. . . .”
    

      “Alas!” sighed Kirilin, “alas! it’s not part of my
      plan to let you go; I only mean to give you a lesson and make you realise.
      And what’s more, madam, I’ve too little faith in women.”
    

      “I’m miserable. . . .”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna listened to the even splash of the sea, looked at the
      sky studded with stars, and longed to make haste and end it all, and get
      away from the cursed sensation of life, with its sea, stars, men, fever.
    

      “Only not in my home,” she said coldly. “Take me
      somewhere else.”
    

      “Come to Muridov’s. That’s better.”
    

      “Where’s that?”
    

      “Near the old wall.”
    

      She walked quickly along the street and then turned into the side-street
      that led towards the mountains. It was dark. There were pale streaks of
      light here and there on the pavement, from the lighted windows, and it
      seemed to her that, like a fly, she kept falling into the ink and crawling
      out into the light again. At one point he stumbled, almost fell down and
      burst out laughing.
    

      “He’s drunk,” thought Nadyezhda Fyodorovna. “Never
      mind. . . . Never mind. . . . So be it.”
    

      Atchmianov, too, soon took leave of the party and followed Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna to ask her to go for a row. He went to her house and looked
      over the fence: the windows were wide open, there were no lights.
    

      “Nadyezhda Fyodorovna!” he called.
    

      A moment passed, he called again.
    

      “Who’s there?” he heard Olga’s voice.
    

      “Is Nadyezhda Fyodorovna at home?”
    

      “No, she has not come in yet.”
    

      “Strange . . . very strange,” thought Atchmianov, feeling very
      uneasy. “She went home. . . .”
    

      He walked along the boulevard, then along the street, and glanced in at
      the windows of Sheshkovsky’s. Laevsky was sitting at the table
      without his coat on, looking attentively at his cards.
    

      “Strange, strange,” muttered Atchmianov, and remembering
      Laevsky’s hysterics, he felt ashamed. “If she is not at home,
      where is she?”
    

      He went to Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s lodgings again, and looked at the
      dark windows.
    

      “It’s a cheat, a cheat . . .” he thought, remembering
      that, meeting him at midday at Marya Konstantinovna’s, she had
      promised to go in a boat with him that evening.
    

      The windows of the house where Kirilin lived were dark, and there was a
      policeman sitting asleep on a little bench at the gate. Everything was
      clear to Atchmianov when he looked at the windows and the policeman. He
      made up his mind to go home, and set off in that direction, but somehow
      found himself near Nadyezhda Fyodorovna’s lodgings again. He sat
      down on the bench near the gate and took off his hat, feeling that his
      head was burning with jealousy and resentment.
    

      The clock in the town church only struck twice in the twenty-four hours—at
      midday and midnight. Soon after it struck midnight he heard hurried
      footsteps.
    

      “To-morrow evening, then, again at Muridov’s,”
      Atchmianov heard, and he recognised Kirilin’s voice. “At eight
      o’clock; good-bye!”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna made her appearance near the garden. Without noticing
      that Atchmianov was sitting on the bench, she passed beside him like a
      shadow, opened the gate, and leaving it open, went into the house. In her
      own room she lighted the candle and quickly undressed, but instead of
      getting into bed, she sank on her knees before a chair, flung her arms
      round it, and rested her head on it.
    

      It was past two when Laevsky came home.
    

      XV
    

      Having made up his mind to lie, not all at once but piecemeal, Laevsky
      went soon after one o’clock next day to Samoylenko to ask for the
      money that he might be sure to get off on Saturday. After his hysterical
      attack, which had added an acute feeling of shame to his depressed state
      of mind, it was unthinkable to remain in the town. If Samoylenko should
      insist on his conditions, he thought it would be possible to agree to them
      and take the money, and next day, just as he was starting, to say that
      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna refused to go. He would be able to persuade her that
      evening that the whole arrangement would be for her benefit. If
      Samoylenko, who was obviously under the influence of Von Koren, should
      refuse the money altogether or make fresh conditions, then he, Laevsky,
      would go off that very evening in a cargo vessel, or even in a
      sailing-boat, to Novy Athon or Novorossiisk, would send from there an
      humiliating telegram, and would stay there till his mother sent him the
      money for the journey.
    

      When he went into Samoylenko’s, he found Von Koren in the
      drawing-room. The zoologist had just arrived for dinner, and, as usual,
      was turning over the album and scrutinising the gentlemen in top-hats and
      the ladies in caps.
    

      “How very unlucky!” thought Laevsky, seeing him. “He may
      be in the way. Good-morning.”
    

      “Good-morning,” answered Von Koren, without looking at him.
    

      “Is Alexandr Daviditch at home?”
    

      “Yes, in the kitchen.”
    

      Laevsky went into the kitchen, but seeing from the door that Samoylenko
      was busy over the salad, he went back into the drawing-room and sat down.
      He always had a feeling of awkwardness in the zoologist’s presence,
      and now he was afraid there would be talk about his attack of hysterics.
      There was more than a minute of silence. Von Koren suddenly raised his
      eyes to Laevsky and asked:
    

      “How do you feel after yesterday?”
    

      “Very well indeed,” said Laevsky, flushing. “It really
      was nothing much. . . .”
    

      “Until yesterday I thought it was only ladies who had hysterics, and
      so at first I thought you had St. Vitus’s dance.”
    

      Laevsky smiled ingratiatingly, and thought:
    

      “How indelicate on his part! He knows quite well how unpleasant it
      is for me. . . .”
    

      “Yes, it was a ridiculous performance,” he said, still
      smiling. “I’ve been laughing over it the whole morning. What’s
      so curious in an attack of hysterics is that you know it is absurd, and
      are laughing at it in your heart, and at the same time you sob. In our
      neurotic age we are the slaves of our nerves; they are our masters and do
      as they like with us. Civilisation has done us a bad turn in that way. . .
      .”
    

      As Laevsky talked, he felt it disagreeable that Von Koren listened to him
      gravely, and looked at him steadily and attentively as though studying
      him; and he was vexed with himself that in spite of his dislike of Von
      Koren, he could not banish the ingratiating smile from his face.
    

      “I must admit, though,” he added, “that there were
      immediate causes for the attack, and quite sufficient ones too. My health
      has been terribly shaky of late. To which one must add boredom, constantly
      being hard up . . . the absence of people and general interests . . . . My
      position is worse than a governor’s.”
    

      “Yes, your position is a hopeless one,” answered Von Koren.
    

      These calm, cold words, implying something between a jeer and an uninvited
      prediction, offended Laevsky. He recalled the zoologist’s eyes the
      evening before, full of mockery and disgust. He was silent for a space and
      then asked, no longer smiling:
    

      “How do you know anything of my position?”
    

      “You were only just speaking of it yourself. Besides, your friends
      take such a warm interest in you, that I am hearing about you all day
      long.”
    

      “What friends? Samoylenko, I suppose?”
    

      “Yes, he too.”
    

      “I would ask Alexandr Daviditch and my friends in general not to
      trouble so much about me.”
    

      “Here is Samoylenko; you had better ask him not to trouble so much
      about you.”
    

      “I don’t understand your tone,” Laevsky muttered,
      suddenly feeling as though he had only just realised that the zoologist
      hated and despised him, and was jeering at him, and was his bitterest and
      most inveterate enemy.
    

      “Keep that tone for some one else,” he said softly, unable to
      speak aloud for the hatred with which his chest and throat were choking,
      as they had been the night before with laughter.
    

      Samoylenko came in in his shirt-sleeves, crimson and perspiring from the
      stifling kitchen.
    

      “Ah, you here?” he said. “Good-morning, my dear boy.
      Have you had dinner? Don’t stand on ceremony. Have you had dinner?”
    

      “Alexandr Daviditch,” said Laevsky, standing up, “though
      I did appeal to you to help me in a private matter, it did not follow that
      I released you from the obligation of discretion and respect for other
      people’s private affairs.”
    

      “What’s this?” asked Samoylenko, in astonishment.
    

      “If you have no money,” Laevsky went on, raising his voice and
      shifting from one foot to the other in his excitement, “don’t
      give it; refuse it. But why spread abroad in every back street that my
      position is hopeless, and all the rest of it? I can’t endure such
      benevolence and friend’s assistance where there’s a
      shilling-worth of talk for a ha’p’orth of help! You can boast
      of your benevolence as much as you please, but no one has given you the
      right to gossip about my private affairs!”
    

      “What private affairs?” asked Samoylenko, puzzled and
      beginning to be angry. “If you’ve come here to be abusive, you
      had better clear out. You can come again afterwards!”
    

      He remembered the rule that when one is angry with one’s neighbour,
      one must begin to count a hundred, and one will grow calm again; and he
      began rapidly counting.
    

      “I beg you not to trouble yourself about me,” Laevsky went on.
      “Don’t pay any attention to me, and whose business is it what
      I do and how I live? Yes, I want to go away. Yes, I get into debt, I
      drink, I am living with another man’s wife, I’m hysterical, I’m
      ordinary. I am not so profound as some people, but whose business is that?
      Respect other people’s privacy.”
    

      “Excuse me, brother,” said Samoylenko, who had counted up to
      thirty-five, “but . . .”
    

      “Respect other people’s individuality!” interrupted
      Laevsky. “This continual gossip about other people’s affairs,
      this sighing and groaning and everlasting prying, this eavesdropping, this
      friendly sympathy . . . damn it all! They lend me money and make
      conditions as though I were a schoolboy! I am treated as the devil knows
      what! I don’t want anything,” shouted Laevsky, staggering with
      excitement and afraid that it might end in another attack of hysterics.
      “I shan’t get away on Saturday, then,” flashed through
      his mind. “I want nothing. All I ask of you is to spare me your
      protecting care. I’m not a boy, and I’m not mad, and I beg you
      to leave off looking after me.”
    

      The deacon came in, and seeing Laevsky pale and gesticulating, addressing
      his strange speech to the portrait of Prince Vorontsov, stood still by the
      door as though petrified.
    

      “This continual prying into my soul,” Laevsky went on, “is
      insulting to my human dignity, and I beg these volunteer detectives to
      give up their spying! Enough!”
    

      “What’s that . . . what did you say?” said Samoylenko,
      who had counted up to a hundred. He turned crimson and went up to Laevsky.
    

      “It’s enough,” said Laevsky, breathing hard and
      snatching up his cap.
    

      “I’m a Russian doctor, a nobleman by birth, and a civil
      councillor,” said Samoylenko emphatically. “I’ve never
      been a spy, and I allow no one to insult me!” he shouted in a
      breaking voice, emphasising the last word. “Hold your tongue!”
    

      The deacon, who had never seen the doctor so majestic, so swelling with
      dignity, so crimson and so ferocious, shut his mouth, ran out into the
      entry and there exploded with laughter.
    

      As though through a fog, Laevsky saw Von Koren get up and, putting his
      hands in his trouser-pockets, stand still in an attitude of expectancy, as
      though waiting to see what would happen. This calm attitude struck Laevsky
      as insolent and insulting to the last degree.
    

      “Kindly take back your words,” shouted Samoylenko.
    

      Laevsky, who did not by now remember what his words were, answered:
    

      “Leave me alone! I ask for nothing. All I ask is that you and German
      upstarts of Jewish origin should let me alone! Or I shall take steps to
      make you! I will fight you!”
    

      “Now we understand,” said Von Koren, coming from behind the
      table. “Mr. Laevsky wants to amuse himself with a duel before he
      goes away. I can give him that pleasure. Mr. Laevsky, I accept your
      challenge.”
    

      “A challenge,” said Laevsky, in a low voice, going up to the
      zoologist and looking with hatred at his swarthy brow and curly hair.
      “A challenge? By all means! I hate you! I hate you!”
    

      “Delighted. To-morrow morning early near Kerbalay’s. I leave
      all details to your taste. And now, clear out!”
    

      “I hate you,” Laevsky said softly, breathing hard. “I
      have hated you a long while! A duel! Yes!”
    

      “Get rid of him, Alexandr Daviditch, or else I’m going,”
      said Von Koren. “He’ll bite me.”
    

      Von Koren’s cool tone calmed the doctor; he seemed suddenly to come
      to himself, to recover his reason; he put both arms round Laevsky’s
      waist, and, leading him away from the zoologist, muttered in a friendly
      voice that shook with emotion:
    

      “My friends . . . dear, good . . . you’ve lost your tempers
      and that’s enough . . . and that’s enough, my friends.”
    

      Hearing his soft, friendly voice, Laevsky felt that something unheard of,
      monstrous, had just happened to him, as though he had been nearly run over
      by a train; he almost burst into tears, waved his hand, and ran out of the
      room.
    

      “To feel that one is hated, to expose oneself before the man who
      hates one, in the most pitiful, contemptible, helpless state. My God, how
      hard it is!” he thought a little while afterwards as he sat in the
      pavilion, feeling as though his body were scarred by the hatred of which
      he had just been the object.
    

      “How coarse it is, my God!”
    

      Cold water with brandy in it revived him. He vividly pictured Von Koren’s
      calm, haughty face; his eyes the day before, his shirt like a rug, his
      voice, his white hand; and heavy, passionate, hungry hatred rankled in his
      breast and clamoured for satisfaction. In his thoughts he felled Von Koren
      to the ground, and trampled him underfoot. He remembered to the minutest
      detail all that had happened, and wondered how he could have smiled
      ingratiatingly to that insignificant man, and how he could care for the
      opinion of wretched petty people whom nobody knew, living in a miserable
      little town which was not, it seemed, even on the map, and of which not
      one decent person in Petersburg had heard. If this wretched little town
      suddenly fell into ruins or caught fire, the telegram with the news would
      be read in Russia with no more interest than an advertisement of the sale
      of second-hand furniture. Whether he killed Von Koren next day or left him
      alive, it would be just the same, equally useless and uninteresting.
      Better to shoot him in the leg or hand, wound him, then laugh at him, and
      let him, like an insect with a broken leg lost in the grass—let him
      be lost with his obscure sufferings in the crowd of insignificant people
      like himself.
    

      Laevsky went to Sheshkovsky, told him all about it, and asked him to be
      his second; then they both went to the superintendent of the postal
      telegraph department, and asked him, too, to be a second, and stayed to
      dinner with him. At dinner there was a great deal of joking and laughing.
      Laevsky made jests at his own expense, saying he hardly knew how to fire
      off a pistol, calling himself a royal archer and William Tell.
    

      “We must give this gentleman a lesson . . .” he said.
    

      After dinner they sat down to cards. Laevsky played, drank wine, and
      thought that duelling was stupid and senseless, as it did not decide the
      question but only complicated it, but that it was sometimes impossible to
      get on without it. In the given case, for instance, one could not, of
      course, bring an action against Von Koren. And this duel was so far good
      in that it made it impossible for Laevsky to remain in the town
      afterwards. He got a little drunk and interested in the game, and felt at
      ease.
    

      But when the sun had set and it grew dark, he was possessed by a feeling
      of uneasiness. It was not fear at the thought of death, because while he
      was dining and playing cards, he had for some reason a confident belief
      that the duel would end in nothing; it was dread at the thought of
      something unknown which was to happen next morning for the first time in
      his life, and dread of the coming night. . . . He knew that the night
      would be long and sleepless, and that he would have to think not only of
      Von Koren and his hatred, but also of the mountain of lies which he had to
      get through, and which he had not strength or ability to dispense with. It
      was as though he had been taken suddenly ill; all at once he lost all
      interest in the cards and in people, grew restless, and began asking them
      to let him go home. He was eager to get into bed, to lie without moving,
      and to prepare his thoughts for the night. Sheshkovsky and the postal
      superintendent saw him home and went on to Von Koren’s to arrange
      about the duel.
    

      Near his lodgings Laevsky met Atchmianov. The young man was breathless and
      excited.
    

      “I am looking for you, Ivan Andreitch,” he said. “I beg
      you to come quickly. . . .”
    

      “Where?”
    

      “Some one wants to see you, some one you don’t know, about
      very important business; he earnestly begs you to come for a minute. He
      wants to speak to you of something. . . . For him it’s a question of
      life and death. . . .” In his excitement Atchmianov spoke in a
      strong Armenian accent.
    

      “Who is it?” asked Laevsky.
    

      “He asked me not to tell you his name.”
    

      “Tell him I’m busy; to-morrow, if he likes. . . .”
    

      “How can you!” Atchmianov was aghast. “He wants to tell
      you something very important for you . . . very important! If you don’t
      come, something dreadful will happen.”
    

      “Strange . . .” muttered Laevsky, unable to understand why
      Atchmianov was so excited and what mysteries there could be in this dull,
      useless little town.
    

      “Strange,” he repeated in hesitation. “Come along,
      though; I don’t care.”
    

      Atchmianov walked rapidly on ahead and Laevsky followed him. They walked
      down a street, then turned into an alley.
    

      “What a bore this is!” said Laevsky.
    

      “One minute, one minute . . . it’s near.”
    

      Near the old rampart they went down a narrow alley between two empty
      enclosures, then they came into a sort of large yard and went towards a
      small house.
    

      “That’s Muridov’s, isn’t it?” asked Laevsky.
    

      “Yes.”
    

      “But why we’ve come by the back yards I don’t
      understand. We might have come by the street; it’s nearer. . . .”
    

      “Never mind, never mind. . . .”
    

      It struck Laevsky as strange, too, that Atchmianov led him to a back
      entrance, and motioned to him as though bidding him go quietly and hold
      his tongue.
    

      “This way, this way . . .” said Atchmianov, cautiously opening
      the door and going into the passage on tiptoe. “Quietly, quietly, I
      beg you . . . they may hear.”
    

      He listened, drew a deep breath and said in a whisper:
    

      “Open that door, and go in . . . don’t be afraid.”
    

      Laevsky, puzzled, opened the door and went into a room with a low ceiling
      and curtained windows.
    

      There was a candle on the table.
    

      “What do you want?” asked some one in the next room. “Is
      it you, Muridov?”
    

      Laevsky turned into that room and saw Kirilin, and beside him Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna.
    

      He didn’t hear what was said to him; he staggered back, and did not
      know how he found himself in the street. His hatred for Von Koren and his
      uneasiness—all had vanished from his soul. As he went home he waved
      his right arm awkwardly and looked carefully at the ground under his feet,
      trying to step where it was smooth. At home in his study he walked
      backwards and forwards, rubbing his hands, and awkwardly shrugging his
      shoulders and neck, as though his jacket and shirt were too tight; then he
      lighted a candle and sat down to the table. . . .
    

      XVI
    

      “The ‘humane studies’ of which you speak will only
      satisfy human thought when, as they advance, they meet the exact sciences
      and progress side by side with them. Whether they will meet under a new
      microscope, or in the monologues of a new Hamlet, or in a new religion, I
      do not know, but I expect the earth will be covered with a crust of ice
      before it comes to pass. Of all humane learning the most durable and
      living is, of course, the teaching of Christ; but look how differently
      even that is interpreted! Some teach that we must love all our neighbours
      but make an exception of soldiers, criminals, and lunatics. They allow the
      first to be killed in war, the second to be isolated or executed, and the
      third they forbid to marry. Other interpreters teach that we must love all
      our neighbours without exception, with no distinction of plus or minus.
      According to their teaching, if a consumptive or a murderer or an
      epileptic asks your daughter in marriage, you must let him have her. If crÃªtins
      go to war against the physically and mentally healthy, don’t defend
      yourselves. This advocacy of love for love’s sake, like art for art’s
      sake, if it could have power, would bring mankind in the long run to
      complete extinction, and so would become the vastest crime that has ever
      been committed upon earth. There are very many interpretations, and since
      there are many of them, serious thought is not satisfied by any one of
      them, and hastens to add its own individual interpretation to the mass.
      For that reason you should never put a question on a philosophical or
      so-called Christian basis; by so doing you only remove the question
      further from solution.”
    

      The deacon listened to the zoologist attentively, thought a little, and
      asked:
    

      “Have the philosophers invented the moral law which is innate in
      every man, or did God create it together with the body?”
    

      “I don’t know. But that law is so universal among all peoples
      and all ages that I fancy we ought to recognise it as organically
      connected with man. It is not invented, but exists and will exist. I don’t
      tell you that one day it will be seen under the microscope, but its
      organic connection is shown, indeed, by evidence: serious affections of
      the brain and all so-called mental diseases, to the best of my belief,
      show themselves first of all in the perversion of the moral law.”
    

      “Good. So then, just as our stomach bids us eat, our moral sense
      bids us love our neighbours. Is that it? But our natural man through
      self-love opposes the voice of conscience and reason, and this gives rise
      to many brain-racking questions. To whom ought we to turn for the solution
      of those questions if you forbid us to put them on the philosophic basis?”
    

      “Turn to what little exact science we have. Trust to evidence and
      the logic of facts. It is true it is but little, but, on the other hand,
      it is less fluid and shifting than philosophy. The moral law, let us
      suppose, demands that you love your neighbour. Well? Love ought to show
      itself in the removal of everything which in one way or another is
      injurious to men and threatens them with danger in the present or in the
      future. Our knowledge and the evidence tells us that the morally and
      physically abnormal are a menace to humanity. If so you must struggle
      against the abnormal; if you are not able to raise them to the normal
      standard you must have strength and ability to render them harmless—that
      is, to destroy them.”
    

      “So love consists in the strong overcoming the weak.”
    

      “Undoubtedly.”
    

      “But you know the strong crucified our Lord Jesus Christ,”
      said the deacon hotly.
    

      “The fact is that those who crucified Him were not the strong but
      the weak. Human culture weakens and strives to nullify the struggle for
      existence and natural selection; hence the rapid advancement of the weak
      and their predominance over the strong. Imagine that you succeeded in
      instilling into bees humanitarian ideas in their crude and elementary
      form. What would come of it? The drones who ought to be killed would
      remain alive, would devour the honey, would corrupt and stifle the bees,
      resulting in the predominance of the weak over the strong and the
      degeneration of the latter. The same process is taking place now with
      humanity; the weak are oppressing the strong. Among savages untouched by
      civilisation the strongest, cleverest, and most moral takes the lead; he
      is the chief and the master. But we civilised men have crucified Christ,
      and we go on crucifying Him, so there is something lacking in us. . . .
      And that something one ought to raise up in ourselves, or there will be no
      end to these errors.”
    

      “But what criterion have you to distinguish the strong from the
      weak?”
    

      “Knowledge and evidence. The tuberculous and the scrofulous are
      recognised by their diseases, and the insane and the immoral by their
      actions.”
    

      “But mistakes may be made!”
    

      “Yes, but it’s no use to be afraid of getting your feet wet
      when you are threatened with the deluge!”
    

      “That’s philosophy,” laughed the deacon.
    

      “Not a bit of it. You are so corrupted by your seminary philosophy
      that you want to see nothing but fog in everything. The abstract studies
      with which your youthful head is stuffed are called abstract just because
      they abstract your minds from what is obvious. Look the devil straight in
      the eye, and if he’s the devil, tell him he’s the devil, and
      don’t go calling to Kant or Hegel for explanations.”
    

      The zoologist paused and went on:
    

      “Twice two’s four, and a stone’s a stone. Here to-morrow
      we have a duel. You and I will say it’s stupid and absurd, that the
      duel is out of date, that there is no real difference between the
      aristocratic duel and the drunken brawl in the pot-house, and yet we shall
      not stop, we shall go there and fight. So there is some force stronger
      than our reasoning. We shout that war is plunder, robbery, atrocity,
      fratricide; we cannot look upon blood without fainting; but the French or
      the Germans have only to insult us for us to feel at once an exaltation of
      spirit; in the most genuine way we shout ‘Hurrah!’ and rush to
      attack the foe. You will invoke the blessing of God on our weapons, and
      our valour will arouse universal and general enthusiasm. Again it follows
      that there is a force, if not higher, at any rate stronger, than us and
      our philosophy. We can no more stop it than that cloud which is moving
      upwards over the sea. Don’t be hypocritical, don’t make a long
      nose at it on the sly; and don’t say, ‘Ah, old-fashioned,
      stupid! Ah, it’s inconsistent with Scripture!’ but look it
      straight in the face, recognise its rational lawfulness, and when, for
      instance, it wants to destroy a rotten, scrofulous, corrupt race, don’t
      hinder it with your pilules and misunderstood quotations from the Gospel.
      Leskov has a story of a conscientious Danila who found a leper outside the
      town, and fed and warmed him in the name of love and of Christ. If that
      Danila had really loved humanity, he would have dragged the leper as far
      as possible from the town, and would have flung him in a pit, and would
      have gone to save the healthy. Christ, I hope, taught us a rational,
      intelligent, practical love.”
    

      “What a fellow you are!” laughed the deacon. “You don’t
      believe in Christ. Why do you mention His name so often?”
    

      “Yes, I do believe in Him. Only, of course, in my own way, not in
      yours. Oh, deacon, deacon!” laughed the zoologist; he put his arm
      round the deacon’s waist, and said gaily: “Well? Are you
      coming with us to the duel to-morrow?”
    

      “My orders don’t allow it, or else I should come.”
    

      “What do you mean by ‘orders’?”
    

      “I have been consecrated. I am in a state of grace.”
    

      “Oh, deacon, deacon,” repeated Von Koren, laughing, “I
      love talking to you.”
    

      “You say you have faith,” said the deacon. “What sort of
      faith is it? Why, I have an uncle, a priest, and he believes so that when
      in time of drought he goes out into the fields to pray for rain, he takes
      his umbrella and leather overcoat for fear of getting wet through on his
      way home. That’s faith! When he speaks of Christ, his face is full
      of radiance, and all the peasants, men and women, weep floods of tears. He
      would stop that cloud and put all those forces you talk about to flight.
      Yes . . . faith moves mountains.”
    

      The deacon laughed and slapped the zoologist on the shoulder.
    

      “Yes . . .” he went on; “here you are teaching all the
      time, fathoming the depths of the ocean, dividing the weak and the strong,
      writing books and challenging to duels—and everything remains as it
      is; but, behold! some feeble old man will mutter just one word with a holy
      spirit, or a new Mahomet, with a sword, will gallop from Arabia, and
      everything will be topsy-turvy, and in Europe not one stone will be left
      standing upon another.”
    

      “Well, deacon, that’s on the knees of the gods.”
    

      “Faith without works is dead, but works without faith are worse
      still—mere waste of time and nothing more.”
    

      The doctor came into sight on the sea-front. He saw the deacon and the
      zoologist, and went up to them.
    

      “I believe everything is ready,” he said, breathing hard.
      “Govorovsky and Boyko will be the seconds. They will start at five o’clock
      in the morning. How it has clouded over,” he said, looking at the
      sky. “One can see nothing; there will be rain directly.”
    

      “I hope you are coming with us?” said the zoologist.
    

      “No, God preserve me; I’m worried enough as it is. Ustimovitch
      is going instead of me. I’ve spoken to him already.”
    

      Far over the sea was a flash of lightning, followed by a hollow roll of
      thunder.
    

      “How stifling it is before a storm!” said Von Koren. “I
      bet you’ve been to Laevsky already and have been weeping on his
      bosom.”
    

      “Why should I go to him?” answered the doctor in confusion.
      “What next?”
    

      Before sunset he had walked several times along the boulevard and the
      street in the hope of meeting Laevsky. He was ashamed of his hastiness and
      the sudden outburst of friendliness which had followed it. He wanted to
      apologise to Laevsky in a joking tone, to give him a good talking to, to
      soothe him and to tell him that the duel was a survival of mediÃ¦val
      barbarism, but that Providence itself had brought them to the duel as a
      means of reconciliation; that the next day, both being splendid and highly
      intelligent people, they would, after exchanging shots, appreciate each
      other’s noble qualities and would become friends. But he could not
      come across Laevsky.
    

      “What should I go and see him for?” repeated Samoylenko.
      “I did not insult him; he insulted me. Tell me, please, why he
      attacked me. What harm had I done him? I go into the drawing-room, and,
      all of a sudden, without the least provocation: ‘Spy!’ There’s
      a nice thing! Tell me, how did it begin? What did you say to him?”
    

      “I told him his position was hopeless. And I was right. It is only
      honest men or scoundrels who can find an escape from any position, but one
      who wants to be at the same time an honest man and a scoundrel —it
      is a hopeless position. But it’s eleven o’clock, gentlemen,
      and we have to be up early to-morrow.”
    

      There was a sudden gust of wind; it blew up the dust on the sea-front,
      whirled it round in eddies, with a howl that drowned the roar of the sea.
    

      “A squall,” said the deacon. “We must go in, our eyes
      are getting full of dust.”
    

      As they went, Samoylenko sighed and, holding his hat, said:
    

      “I suppose I shan’t sleep to-night.”
    

      “Don’t you agitate yourself,” laughed the zoologist.
      “You can set your mind at rest; the duel will end in nothing.
      Laevsky will magnanimously fire into the air—he can do nothing else;
      and I daresay I shall not fire at all. To be arrested and lose my time on
      Laevsky’s account—the game’s not worth the candle. By
      the way, what is the punishment for duelling?”
    

      “Arrest, and in the case of the death of your opponent a maximum of
      three years’ imprisonment in the fortress.”
    

      “The fortress of St. Peter and St. Paul?”
    

      “No, in a military fortress, I believe.”
    

      “Though this fine gentleman ought to have a lesson!”
    

      Behind them on the sea, there was a flash of lightning, which for an
      instant lighted up the roofs of the houses and the mountains. The friends
      parted near the boulevard. When the doctor disappeared in the darkness and
      his steps had died away, Von Koren shouted to him:
    

      “I only hope the weather won’t interfere with us to-morrow!”
    

      “Very likely it will! Please God it may!”
    

      “Good-night!”
    

      “What about the night? What do you say?”
    

      In the roar of the wind and the sea and the crashes of thunder, it was
      difficult to hear.
    

      “It’s nothing,” shouted the zoologist, and hurried home.
    

      XVII
    

             “Upon my mind, weighed down with woe,
              Crowd thoughts, a heavy multitude:
              In silence memory unfolds
              Her long, long scroll before my eyes.
              Loathing and shuddering I curse
              And bitterly lament in vain,
              And bitter though the tears I weep
              I do not wash those lines away.”

                                      PUSHKIN.


      Whether they killed him next morning, or mocked at him—that is, left
      him his life—he was ruined, anyway. Whether this disgraced woman
      killed herself in her shame and despair, or dragged on her pitiful
      existence, she was ruined anyway.
    

      So thought Laevsky as he sat at the table late in the evening, still
      rubbing his hands. The windows suddenly blew open with a bang; a violent
      gust of wind burst into the room, and the papers fluttered from the table.
      Laevsky closed the windows and bent down to pick up the papers. He was
      aware of something new in his body, a sort of awkwardness he had not felt
      before, and his movements were strange to him. He moved timidly, jerking
      with his elbows and shrugging his shoulders; and when he sat down to the
      table again, he again began rubbing his hands. His body had lost its
      suppleness.
    

      On the eve of death one ought to write to one’s nearest relation.
      Laevsky thought of this. He took a pen and wrote with a tremulous hand:
    

      “Mother!”
    

      He wanted to write to beg his mother, for the sake of the merciful God in
      whom she believed, that she would give shelter and bring a little warmth
      and kindness into the life of the unhappy woman who, by his doing, had
      been disgraced and was in solitude, poverty, and weakness, that she would
      forgive and forget everything, everything, everything, and by her
      sacrifice atone to some extent for her son’s terrible sin. But he
      remembered how his mother, a stout, heavily-built old woman in a lace cap,
      used to go out into the garden in the morning, followed by her companion
      with the lap-dog; how she used to shout in a peremptory way to the
      gardener and the servants, and how proud and haughty her face was—he
      remembered all this and scratched out the word he had written.
    

      There was a vivid flash of lightning at all three windows, and it was
      followed by a prolonged, deafening roll of thunder, beginning with a
      hollow rumble and ending with a crash so violent that all the window-panes
      rattled. Laevsky got up, went to the window, and pressed his forehead
      against the pane. There was a fierce, magnificent storm. On the horizon
      lightning-flashes were flung in white streams from the storm-clouds into
      the sea, lighting up the high, dark waves over the far-away expanse. And
      to right and to left, and, no doubt, over the house too, the lightning
      flashed.
    

      “The storm!” whispered Laevsky; he had a longing to pray to
      some one or to something, if only to the lightning or the storm-clouds.
      “Dear storm!”
    

      He remembered how as a boy he used to run out into the garden without a
      hat on when there was a storm, and how two fair-haired girls with blue
      eyes used to run after him, and how they got wet through with the rain;
      they laughed with delight, but when there was a loud peal of thunder, the
      girls used to nestle up to the boy confidingly, while he crossed himself
      and made haste to repeat: “Holy, holy, holy. . . .” Oh, where
      had they vanished to! In what sea were they drowned, those dawning days of
      pure, fair life? He had no fear of the storm, no love of nature now; he
      had no God. All the confiding girls he had ever known had by now been
      ruined by him and those like him. All his life he had not planted one tree
      in his own garden, nor grown one blade of grass; and living among the
      living, he had not saved one fly; he had done nothing but destroy and
      ruin, and lie, lie. . . .
    

      “What in my past was not vice?” he asked himself, trying to
      clutch at some bright memory as a man falling down a precipice clutches at
      the bushes.
    

      School? The university? But that was a sham. He had neglected his work and
      forgotten what he had learnt. The service of his country? That, too, was a
      sham, for he did nothing in the Service, took a salary for doing nothing,
      and it was an abominable swindling of the State for which one was not
      punished.
    

      He had no craving for truth, and had not sought it; spellbound by vice and
      lying, his conscience had slept or been silent. Like a stranger, like an
      alien from another planet, he had taken no part in the common life of men,
      had been indifferent to their sufferings, their ideas, their religion,
      their sciences, their strivings, and their struggles. He had not said one
      good word, not written one line that was not useless and vulgar; he had
      not done his fellows one ha’p’orth of service, but had eaten
      their bread, drunk their wine, seduced their wives, lived on their
      thoughts, and to justify his contemptible, parasitic life in their eyes
      and in his own, he had always tried to assume an air of being higher and
      better than they. Lies, lies, lies. . . .
    

      He vividly remembered what he had seen that evening at Muridov’s,
      and he was in an insufferable anguish of loathing and misery. Kirilin and
      Atchmianov were loathsome, but they were only continuing what he had
      begun; they were his accomplices and his disciples. This young weak woman
      had trusted him more than a brother, and he had deprived her of her
      husband, of her friends and of her country, and had brought her here—to
      the heat, to fever, and to boredom; and from day to day she was bound to
      reflect, like a mirror, his idleness, his viciousness and falsity—and
      that was all she had had to fill her weak, listless, pitiable life. Then
      he had grown sick of her, had begun to hate her, but had not had the pluck
      to abandon her, and he had tried to entangle her more and more closely in
      a web of lies. . . . These men had done the rest.
    

      Laevsky sat at the table, then got up and went to the window; at one
      minute he put out the candle and then he lighted it again. He cursed
      himself aloud, wept and wailed, and asked forgiveness; several times he
      ran to the table in despair, and wrote:
    

      “Mother!”
    

      Except his mother, he had no relations or near friends; but how could his
      mother help him? And where was she? He had an impulse to run to Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, to fall at her feet, to kiss her hands and feet, to beg her
      forgiveness; but she was his victim, and he was afraid of her as though
      she were dead.
    

      “My life is ruined,” he repeated, rubbing his hands. “Why
      am I still alive, my God! . . .”
    

      He had cast out of heaven his dim star; it had fallen, and its track was
      lost in the darkness of night. It would never return to the sky again,
      because life was given only once and never came a second time. If he could
      have turned back the days and years of the past, he would have replaced
      the falsity with truth, the idleness with work, the boredom with
      happiness; he would have given back purity to those whom he had robbed of
      it. He would have found God and goodness, but that was as impossible as to
      put back the fallen star into the sky, and because it was impossible he
      was in despair.
    

      When the storm was over, he sat by the open window and thought calmly of
      what was before him. Von Koren would most likely kill him. The man’s
      clear, cold theory of life justified the destruction of the rotten and the
      useless; if it changed at the crucial moment, it would be the hatred and
      the repugnance that Laevsky inspired in him that would save him. If he
      missed his aim or, in mockery of his hated opponent, only wounded him, or
      fired in the air, what could he do then? Where could he go?
    

      “Go to Petersburg?” Laevsky asked himself. But that would mean
      beginning over again the old life which he cursed. And the man who seeks
      salvation in change of place like a migrating bird would find nothing
      anywhere, for all the world is alike to him. Seek salvation in men? In
      whom and how? Samoylenko’s kindness and generosity could no more
      save him than the deacon’s laughter or Von Koren’s hatred. He
      must look for salvation in himself alone, and if there were no finding it,
      why waste time? He must kill himself, that was all. . . .
    

      He heard the sound of a carriage. It was getting light. The carriage
      passed by, turned, and crunching on the wet sand, stopped near the house.
      There were two men in the carriage.
    

      “Wait a minute; I’m coming directly,” Laevsky said to
      them out of the window. “I’m not asleep. Surely it’s not
      time yet?”
    

      “Yes, it’s four o’clock. By the time we get there . . .
      .”
    

      Laevsky put on his overcoat and cap, put some cigarettes in his pocket,
      and stood still hesitating. He felt as though there was something else he
      must do. In the street the seconds talked in low voices and the horses
      snorted, and this sound in the damp, early morning, when everybody was
      asleep and light was hardly dawning in the sky, filled Laevsky’s
      soul with a disconsolate feeling which was like a presentiment of evil. He
      stood for a little, hesitating, and went into the bedroom.
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna was lying stretched out on the bed, wrapped from head
      to foot in a rug. She did not stir, and her whole appearance, especially
      her head, suggested an Egyptian mummy. Looking at her in silence, Laevsky
      mentally asked her forgiveness, and thought that if the heavens were not
      empty and there really were a God, then He would save her; if there were
      no God, then she had better perish—there was nothing for her to live
      for.
    

      All at once she jumped up, and sat up in bed. Lifting her pale face and
      looking with horror at Laevsky, she asked:
    

      “Is it you? Is the storm over?”
    

      “Yes.”
    

      She remembered; put both hands to her head and shuddered all over.
    

      “How miserable I am!” she said. “If only you knew how
      miserable I am! I expected,” she went on, half closing her eyes,
      “that you would kill me or turn me out of the house into the rain
      and storm, but you delay . . . delay . . .”
    

      Warmly and impulsively he put his arms round her and covered her knees and
      hands with kisses. Then when she muttered something and shuddered with the
      thought of the past, he stroked her hair, and looking into her face,
      realised that this unhappy, sinful woman was the one creature near and
      dear to him, whom no one could replace.
    

      When he went out of the house and got into the carriage he wanted to
      return home alive.
    

      XVIII
    

      The deacon got up, dressed, took his thick, gnarled stick and slipped
      quietly out of the house. It was dark, and for the first minute when he
      went into the street, he could not even see his white stick. There was not
      a single star in the sky, and it looked as though there would be rain
      again. There was a smell of wet sand and sea.
    

      “It’s to be hoped that the mountaineers won’t attack us,”
      thought the deacon, hearing the tap of the stick on the pavement, and
      noticing how loud and lonely the taps sounded in the stillness of the
      night.
    

      When he got out of town, he began to see both the road and his stick. Here
      and there in the black sky there were dark cloudy patches, and soon a star
      peeped out and timidly bGlinked its one eye. The deacon walked along the
      high rocky coast and did not see the sea; it was slumbering below, and its
      unseen waves broke languidly and heavily on the shore, as though sighing
      “Ouf!” and how slowly! One wave broke—the deacon had
      time to count eight steps; then another broke, and six steps; later a
      third. As before, nothing could be seen, and in the darkness one could
      hear the languid, drowsy drone of the sea. One could hear the infinitely
      faraway, inconceivable time when God moved above chaos.
    

      The deacon felt uncanny. He hoped God would not punish him for keeping
      company with infidels, and even going to look at their duels. The duel
      would be nonsensical, bloodless, absurd, but however that might be, it was
      a heathen spectacle, and it was altogether unseemly for an ecclesiastical
      person to be present at it. He stopped and wondered—should he go
      back? But an intense, restless curiosity triumphed over his doubts, and he
      went on.
    

      “Though they are infidels they are good people, and will be saved,”
      he assured himself. “They are sure to be saved,” he said
      aloud, lighting a cigarette.
    

      By what standard must one measure men’s qualities, to judge rightly
      of them? The deacon remembered his enemy, the inspector of the clerical
      school, who believed in God, lived in chastity, and did not fight duels;
      but he used to feed the deacon on bread with sand in it, and on one
      occasion almost pulled off the deacon’s ear. If human life was so
      artlessly constructed that every one respected this cruel and dishonest
      inspector who stole the Government flour, and his health and salvation
      were prayed for in the schools, was it just to shun such men as Von Koren
      and Laevsky, simply because they were unbelievers? The deacon was weighing
      this question, but he recalled how absurd Samoylenko had looked yesterday,
      and that broke the thread of his ideas. What fun they would have next day!
      The deacon imagined how he would sit under a bush and look on, and when
      Von Koren began boasting next day at dinner, he, the deacon, would begin
      laughing and telling him all the details of the duel.
    

      “How do you know all about it?” the zoologist would ask.
    

      “Well, there you are! I stayed at home, but I know all about it.”
    

      It would be nice to write a comic description of the duel. His
      father-in-law would read it and laugh. A good story, told or written, was
      more than meat and drink to his father-in-law.
    

      The valley of the Yellow River opened before him. The stream was broader
      and fiercer for the rain, and instead of murmuring as before, it was
      raging. It began to get light. The grey, dingy morning, and the clouds
      racing towards the west to overtake the storm-clouds, the mountains girt
      with mist, and the wet trees, all struck the deacon as ugly and sinister.
      He washed at the brook, repeated his morning prayer, and felt a longing
      for tea and hot rolls, with sour cream, which were served every morning at
      his father-in-law’s. He remembered his wife and the “Days past
      Recall,” which she played on the piano. What sort of woman was she?
      His wife had been introduced, betrothed, and married to him all in one
      week: he had lived with her less than a month when he was ordered here, so
      that he had not had time to find out what she was like. All the same, he
      rather missed her.
    

      “I must write her a nice letter . . .” he thought. The flag on
      the duhan hung limp, soaked by the rain, and the duhan
      itself with its wet roof seemed darker and lower than it had been before.
      Near the door was standing a cart; Kerbalay, with two mountaineers and a
      young Tatar woman in trousers—no doubt Kerbalay’s wife or
      daughter—were bringing sacks of something out of the duhan,
      and putting them on maize straw in the cart.
    

      Near the cart stood a pair of asses hanging their heads. When they had put
      in all the sacks, the mountaineers and the Tatar woman began covering them
      over with straw, while Kerbalay began hurriedly harnessing the asses.
    

      “Smuggling, perhaps,” thought the deacon.
    

      Here was the fallen tree with the dried pine-needles, here was the
      blackened patch from the fire. He remembered the picnic and all its
      incidents, the fire, the singing of the mountaineers, his sweet dreams of
      becoming a bishop, and of the Church procession. . . . The Black River had
      grown blacker and broader with the rain. The deacon walked cautiously over
      the narrow bridge, which by now was reached by the topmost crests of the
      dirty water, and went up through the little copse to the drying-shed.
    

      “A splendid head,” he thought, stretching himself on the
      straw, and thinking of Von Koren. “A fine head—God grant him
      health; only there is cruelty in him. . . .”
    

      Why did he hate Laevsky and Laevsky hate him? Why were they going to fight
      a duel? If from their childhood they had known poverty as the deacon had;
      if they had been brought up among ignorant, hard-hearted, grasping, coarse
      and ill-mannered people who grudged you a crust of bread, who spat on the
      floor and hiccoughed at dinner and at prayers; if they had not been spoilt
      from childhood by the pleasant surroundings and the select circle of
      friends they lived in—how they would have rushed at each other, how
      readily they would have overlooked each other’s shortcomings and
      would have prized each other’s strong points! Why, how few even
      outwardly decent people there were in the world! It was true that Laevsky
      was flighty, dissipated, queer, but he did not steal, did not spit loudly
      on the floor; he did not abuse his wife and say, “You’ll eat
      till you burst, but you don’t want to work;” he would not beat
      a child with reins, or give his servants stinking meat to eat—
      surely this was reason enough to be indulgent to him? Besides, he was the
      chief sufferer from his failings, like a sick man from his sores. Instead
      of being led by boredom and some sort of misunderstanding to look for
      degeneracy, extinction, heredity, and other such incomprehensible things
      in each other, would they not do better to stoop a little lower and turn
      their hatred and anger where whole streets resounded with moanings from
      coarse ignorance, greed, scolding, impurity, swearing, the shrieks of
      women. . . .
    

      The sound of a carriage interrupted the deacon’s thoughts. He
      glanced out of the door and saw a carriage and in it three persons:
      Laevsky, Sheshkovsky, and the superintendent of the post-office.
    

      “Stop!” said Sheshkovsky.
    

      All three got out of the carriage and looked at one another.
    

      “They are not here yet,” said Sheshkovsky, shaking the mud
      off. “Well? Till the show begins, let us go and find a suitable
      spot; there’s not room to turn round here.”
    

      They went further up the river and soon vanished from sight. The Tatar
      driver sat in the carriage with his head resting on his shoulder and fell
      asleep. After waiting ten minutes the deacon came out of the drying-shed,
      and taking off his black hat that he might not be noticed, he began
      threading his way among the bushes and strips of maize along the bank,
      crouching and looking about him. The grass and maize were wet, and big
      drops fell on his head from the trees and bushes. “Disgraceful!”
      he muttered, picking up his wet and muddy skirt. “Had I realised it,
      I would not have come.”
    

      Soon he heard voices and caught sight of them. Laevsky was walking rapidly
      to and fro in the small glade with bowed back and hands thrust in his
      sleeves; his seconds were standing at the water’s edge, rolling
      cigarettes.
    

      “Strange,” thought the deacon, not recognising Laevsky’s
      walk; “he looks like an old man. . . .”
    

      “How rude it is of them!” said the superintendent of the
      post-office, looking at his watch. “It may be learned manners to be
      late, but to my thinking it’s hoggish.”
    

      Sheshkovsky, a stout man with a black beard, listened and said:
    

      “They’re coming!”
    

      XIX
    

      “It’s the first time in my life I’ve seen it! How
      glorious!” said Von Koren, pointing to the glade and stretching out
      his hands to the east. “Look: green rays!”
    

      In the east behind the mountains rose two green streaks of light, and it
      really was beautiful. The sun was rising.
    

      “Good-morning!” the zoologist went on, nodding to Laevsky’s
      seconds. “I’m not late, am I?”
    

      He was followed by his seconds, Boyko and Govorovsky, two very young
      officers of the same height, wearing white tunics, and Ustimovitch, the
      thin, unsociable doctor; in one hand he had a bag of some sort, and in the
      other hand, as usual, a cane which he held behind him. Laying the bag on
      the ground and greeting no one, he put the other hand, too, behind his
      back and began pacing up and down the glade.
    

      Laevsky felt the exhaustion and awkwardness of a man who is soon perhaps
      to die, and is for that reason an object of general attention. He wanted
      to be killed as soon as possible or taken home. He saw the sunrise now for
      the first time in his life; the early morning, the green rays of light,
      the dampness, and the men in wet boots, seemed to him to have nothing to
      do with his life, to be superfluous and embarrassing. All this had no
      connection with the night he had been through, with his thoughts and his
      feeling of guilt, and so he would have gladly gone away without waiting
      for the duel.
    

      Von Koren was noticeably excited and tried to conceal it, pretending that
      he was more interested in the green light than anything. The seconds were
      confused, and looked at one another as though wondering why they were here
      and what they were to do.
    

      “I imagine, gentlemen, there is no need for us to go further,”
      said Sheshkovsky. “This place will do.”
    

      “Yes, of course,” Von Koren agreed.
    

      A silence followed. Ustimovitch, pacing to and fro, suddenly turned
      sharply to Laevsky and said in a low voice, breathing into his face:
    

      “They have very likely not told you my terms yet. Each side is to
      pay me fifteen roubles, and in the case of the death of one party, the
      survivor is to pay thirty.”
    

      Laevsky was already acquainted with the man, but now for the first time he
      had a distinct view of his lustreless eyes, his stiff moustaches, and
      wasted, consumptive neck; he was a money-grubber, not a doctor; his breath
      had an unpleasant smell of beef.
    

      “What people there are in the world!” thought Laevsky, and
      answered: “Very good.”
    

      The doctor nodded and began pacing to and fro again, and it was evident he
      did not need the money at all, but simply asked for it from hatred. Every
      one felt it was time to begin, or to end what had been begun, but instead
      of beginning or ending, they stood about, moved to and fro and smoked. The
      young officers, who were present at a duel for the first time in their
      lives, and even now hardly believed in this civilian and, to their
      thinking, unnecessary duel, looked critically at their tunics and stroked
      their sleeves. Sheshkovsky went up to them and said softly: “Gentlemen,
      we must use every effort to prevent this duel; they ought to be
      reconciled.”
    

      He flushed crimson and added:
    

      “Kirilin was at my rooms last night complaining that Laevsky had
      found him with Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and all that sort of thing.”
    

      “Yes, we know that too,” said Boyko.
    

      “Well, you see, then . . . Laevsky’s hands are trembling and
      all that sort of thing . . . he can scarcely hold a pistol now. To fight
      with him is as inhuman as to fight a man who is drunk or who has typhoid.
      If a reconciliation cannot be arranged, we ought to put off the duel,
      gentlemen, or something. . . . It’s such a sickening business, I can’t
      bear to see it.”
    

      “Talk to Von Koren.”
    

      “I don’t know the rules of duelling, damnation take them, and
      I don’t want to either; perhaps he’ll imagine Laevsky funks it
      and has sent me to him, but he can think what he likes—I’ll
      speak to him.”
    

      Sheshkovsky hesitatingly walked up to Von Koren with a slight limp, as
      though his leg had gone to sleep; and as he went towards him, clearing his
      throat, his whole figure was a picture of indolence.
    

      “There’s something I must say to you, sir,” he began,
      carefully scrutinising the flowers on the zoologist’s shirt. “It’s
      confidential. I don’t know the rules of duelling, damnation take
      them, and I don’t want to, and I look on the matter not as a second
      and that sort of thing, but as a man, and that’s all about it.”
    

      “Yes. Well?”
    

      “When seconds suggest reconciliation they are usually not listened
      to; it is looked upon as a formality. Amour propre and all that.
      But I humbly beg you to look carefully at Ivan Andreitch. He’s not
      in a normal state, so to speak, to-day—not in his right mind, and a
      pitiable object. He has had a misfortune. I can’t endure gossip. . .
      .”
    

      Sheshkovsky flushed crimson and looked round.
    

      “But in view of the duel, I think it necessary to inform you,
      Laevsky found his madam last night at Muridov’s with . . . another
      gentleman.”
    

      “How disgusting!” muttered the zoologist; he turned pale,
      frowned, and spat loudly. “Tfoo!”
    

      His lower lip quivered, he walked away from Sheshkovsky, unwilling to hear
      more, and as though he had accidentally tasted something bitter, spat
      loudly again, and for the first time that morning looked with hatred at
      Laevsky. His excitement and awkwardness passed off; he tossed his head and
      said aloud:
    

      “Gentlemen, what are we waiting for, I should like to know? Why don’t
      we begin?”
    

      Sheshkovsky glanced at the officers and shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “Gentlemen,” he said aloud, addressing no one in particular.
      “Gentlemen, we propose that you should be reconciled.”
    

      “Let us make haste and get the formalities over,” said Von
      Koren. “Reconciliation has been discussed already. What is the next
      formality? Make haste, gentlemen, time won’t wait for us.”
    

      “But we insist on reconciliation all the same,” said
      Sheshkovsky in a guilty voice, as a man compelled to interfere in another
      man’s business; he flushed, laid his hand on his heart, and went on:
      “Gentlemen, we see no grounds for associating the offence with the
      duel. There’s nothing in common between duelling and offences
      against one another of which we are sometimes guilty through human
      weakness. You are university men and men of culture, and no doubt you see
      in the duel nothing but a foolish and out-of-date formality, and all that
      sort of thing. That’s how we look at it ourselves, or we shouldn’t
      have come, for we cannot allow that in our presence men should fire at one
      another, and all that.” Sheshkovsky wiped the perspiration off his
      face and went on: “Make an end to your misunderstanding, gentlemen;
      shake hands, and let us go home and drink to peace. Upon my honour,
      gentlemen!”
    

      Von Koren did not speak. Laevsky, seeing that they were looking at him,
      said:
    

      “I have nothing against Nikolay Vassilitch; if he considers I’m
      to blame, I’m ready to apologise to him.”
    

      Von Koren was offended.
    

      “It is evident, gentlemen,” he said, “you want Mr.
      Laevsky to return home a magnanimous and chivalrous figure, but I cannot
      give you and him that satisfaction. And there was no need to get up early
      and drive eight miles out of town simply to drink to peace, to have
      breakfast, and to explain to me that the duel is an out-of-date formality.
      A duel is a duel, and there is no need to make it more false and stupid
      than it is in reality. I want to fight!”
    

      A silence followed. Boyko took a pair of pistols out of a box; one was
      given to Von Koren and one to Laevsky, and then there followed a
      difficulty which afforded a brief amusement to the zoologist and the
      seconds. It appeared that of all the people present not one had ever in
      his life been at a duel, and no one knew precisely how they ought to
      stand, and what the seconds ought to say and do. But then Boyko remembered
      and began, with a smile, to explain.
    

      “Gentlemen, who remembers the description in Lermontov?” asked
      Von Koren, laughing. “In Turgenev, too, Bazarov had a duel with some
      one. . . .”
    

      “There’s no need to remember,” said Ustimovitch
      impatiently. “Measure the distance, that’s all.”
    

      And he took three steps as though to show how to measure it. Boyko counted
      out the steps while his companion drew his sabre and scratched the earth
      at the extreme points to mark the barrier. In complete silence the
      opponents took their places.
    

      “Moles,” the deacon thought, sitting in the bushes.
    

      Sheshkovsky said something, Boyko explained something again, but Laevsky
      did not hear—or rather heard, but did not understand. He cocked his
      pistol when the time came to do so, and raised the cold, heavy weapon with
      the barrel upwards. He forgot to unbutton his overcoat, and it felt very
      tight over his shoulder and under his arm, and his arm rose as awkwardly
      as though the sleeve had been cut out of tin. He remembered the hatred he
      had felt the night before for the swarthy brow and curly hair, and felt
      that even yesterday at the moment of intense hatred and anger he could not
      have shot a man. Fearing that the bullet might somehow hit Von Koren by
      accident, he raised the pistol higher and higher, and felt that this too
      obvious magnanimity was indelicate and anything but magnanimous, but he
      did not know how else to do and could do nothing else. Looking at the
      pale, ironically smiling face of Von Koren, who evidently had been
      convinced from the beginning that his opponent would fire in the air,
      Laevsky thought that, thank God, everything would be over directly, and
      all that he had to do was to press the trigger rather hard. . . .
    

      He felt a violent shock on the shoulder; there was the sound of a shot and
      an answering echo in the mountains: ping-ting!
    

      Von Koren cocked his pistol and looked at Ustimovitch, who was pacing as
      before with his hands behind his back, taking no notice of any one.
    

      “Doctor,” said the zoologist, “be so good as not to move
      to and fro like a pendulum. You make me dizzy.”
    

      The doctor stood still. Von Koren began to take aim at Laevsky.
    

      “It’s all over!” thought Laevsky.
    

      The barrel of the pistol aimed straight at his face, the expression of
      hatred and contempt in Von Koren’s attitude and whole figure, and
      the murder just about to be committed by a decent man in broad daylight,
      in the presence of decent men, and the stillness and the unknown force
      that compelled Laevsky to stand still and not to run —how mysterious
      it all was, how incomprehensible and terrible!
    

      The moment while Von Koren was taking aim seemed to Laevsky longer than a
      night: he glanced imploringly at the seconds; they were pale and did not
      stir.
    

      “Make haste and fire,” thought Laevsky, and felt that his
      pale, quivering, and pitiful face must arouse even greater hatred in Von
      Koren.
    

      “I’ll kill him directly,” thought Von Koren, aiming at
      his forehead, with his finger already on the catch. “Yes, of course
      I’ll kill him.”
    

      “He’ll kill him!” A despairing shout was suddenly heard
      somewhere very close at hand.
    

      A shot rang out at once. Seeing that Laevsky remained standing where he
      was and did not fall, they all looked in the direction from which the
      shout had come, and saw the deacon. With pale face and wet hair sticking
      to his forehead and his cheeks, wet through and muddy, he was standing in
      the maize on the further bank, smiling rather queerly and waving his wet
      hat. Sheshkovsky laughed with joy, burst into tears, and moved away. . . .
    

      XX
    

      A little while afterwards, Von Koren and the deacon met near the little
      bridge. The deacon was excited; he breathed hard, and avoided looking in
      people’s faces. He felt ashamed both of his terror and his muddy,
      wet garments.
    

      “I thought you meant to kill him . . .” he muttered. “How
      contrary to human nature it is! How utterly unnatural it is!”
    

      “But how did you come here?” asked the zoologist.
    

      “Don’t ask,” said the deacon, waving his hand. “The
      evil one tempted me, saying: ‘Go, go. . . .’ So I went and
      almost died of fright in the maize. But now, thank God, thank God. . . . I
      am awfully pleased with you,” muttered the deacon. “Old
      Grandad Tarantula will be glad . . . . It’s funny, it’s too
      funny! Only I beg of you most earnestly don’t tell anybody I was
      there, or I may get into hot water with the authorities. They will say:
      ‘The deacon was a second.’”
    

      “Gentlemen,” said Von Koren, “the deacon asks you not to
      tell any one you’ve seen him here. He might get into trouble.”
    

      “How contrary to human nature it is!” sighed the deacon.
      “Excuse my saying so, but your face was so dreadful that I thought
      you were going to kill him.”
    

      “I was very much tempted to put an end to that scoundrel,”
      said Von Koren, “but you shouted close by, and I missed my aim. The
      whole procedure is revolting to any one who is not used to it, and it has
      exhausted me, deacon. I feel awfully tired. Come along. . . .”
    

      “No, you must let me walk back. I must get dry, for I am wet and
      cold.”
    

      “Well, as you like,” said the zoologist, in a weary tone,
      feeling dispirited, and, getting into the carriage, he closed his eyes.
      “As you like. . . .”
    

      While they were moving about the carriages and taking their seats,
      Kerbalay stood in the road, and, laying his hands on his stomach, he bowed
      low, showing his teeth; he imagined that the gentry had come to enjoy the
      beauties of nature and drink tea, and could not understand why they were
      getting into the carriages. The party set off in complete silence and only
      the deacon was left by the duhan.
    

      “Come to the duhan, drink tea,” he said to Kerbalay.
      “Me wants to eat.”
    

      Kerbalay spoke good Russian, but the deacon imagined that the Tatar would
      understand him better if he talked to him in broken Russian. “Cook
      omelette, give cheese. . . .”
    

      “Come, come, father,” said Kerbalay, bowing. “I’ll
      give you everything . . . . I’ve cheese and wine. . . . Eat what you
      like.”
    

      “What is ‘God’ in Tatar?” asked the deacon, going
      into the duhan.
    

      “Your God and my God are the same,” said Kerbalay, not
      understanding him. “God is the same for all men, only men are
      different. Some are Russian, some are Turks, some are English—there
      are many sorts of men, but God is one.”
    

      “Very good. If all men worship the same God, why do you Mohammedans
      look upon Christians as your everlasting enemies?”
    

      “Why are you angry?” said Kerbalay, laying both hands on his
      stomach. “You are a priest; I am a Mussulman: you say, ‘I want
      to eat’—I give it you. . . . Only the rich man distinguishes
      your God from my God; for the poor man it is all the same. If you please,
      it is ready.”
    

      While this theological conversation was taking place at the duhan,
      Laevsky was driving home thinking how dreadful it had been driving there
      at daybreak, when the roads, the rocks, and the mountains were wet and
      dark, and the uncertain future seemed like a terrible abyss, of which one
      could not see the bottom; while now the raindrops hanging on the grass and
      on the stones were sparkling in the sun like diamonds, nature was smiling
      joyfully, and the terrible future was left behind. He looked at
      Sheshkovsky’s sullen, tear-stained face, and at the two carriages
      ahead of them in which Von Koren, his seconds, and the doctor were
      sitting, and it seemed to him as though they were all coming back from a
      graveyard in which a wearisome, insufferable man who was a burden to
      others had just been buried.
    

      “Everything is over,” he thought of his past, cautiously
      touching his neck with his fingers.
    

      On the right side of his neck was a small swelling, of the length and
      breadth of his little finger, and he felt a pain, as though some one had
      passed a hot iron over his neck. The bullet had bruised it.
    

      Afterwards, when he got home, a strange, long, sweet day began for him,
      misty as forgetfulness. Like a man released from prison or from hospital,
      he stared at the long-familiar objects and wondered that the tables, the
      windows, the chairs, the light, and the sea stirred in him a keen,
      childish delight such as he had not known for long, long years. Nadyezhda
      Fyodorovna, pale and haggard, could not understand his gentle voice and
      strange movements; she made haste to tell him everything that had happened
      to her. . . . It seemed to her that very likely he scarcely heard and did
      not understand her, and that if he did know everything he would curse her
      and kill her, but he listened to her, stroked her face and hair, looked
      into her eyes and said:
    

      “I have nobody but you. . . .”
    

      Then they sat a long while in the garden, huddled close together, saying
      nothing, or dreaming aloud of their happy life in the future, in brief,
      broken sentences, while it seemed to him that he had never spoken at such
      length or so eloquently.
    

      XXI
    

      More than three months had passed.
    

      The day came that Von Koren had fixed on for his departure. A cold, heavy
      rain had been falling from early morning, a north-east wind was blowing,
      and the waves were high on the sea. It was said that the steamer would
      hardly be able to come into the harbour in such weather. By the time-table
      it should have arrived at ten o’clock in the morning, but Von Koren,
      who had gone on to the sea-front at midday and again after dinner, could
      see nothing through the field-glass but grey waves and rain covering the
      horizon.
    

      Towards the end of the day the rain ceased and the wind began to drop
      perceptibly. Von Koren had already made up his mind that he would not be
      able to get off that day, and had settled down to play chess with
      Samoylenko; but after dark the orderly announced that there were lights on
      the sea and that a rocket had been seen.
    

      Von Koren made haste. He put his satchel over his shoulder, and kissed
      Samoylenko and the deacon. Though there was not the slightest necessity,
      he went through the rooms again, said good-bye to the orderly and the
      cook, and went out into the street, feeling that he had left something
      behind, either at the doctor’s or his lodging. In the street he
      walked beside Samoylenko, behind them came the deacon with a box, and last
      of all the orderly with two portmanteaus. Only Samoylenko and the orderly
      could distinguish the dim lights on the sea. The others gazed into the
      darkness and saw nothing. The steamer had stopped a long way from the
      coast.
    

      “Make haste, make haste,” Von Koren hurried them. “I am
      afraid it will set off.”
    

      As they passed the little house with three windows, into which Laevsky had
      moved soon after the duel, Von Koren could not resist peeping in at the
      window. Laevsky was sitting, writing, bent over the table, with his back
      to the window.
    

      “I wonder at him!” said the zoologist softly. “What a
      screw he has put on himself!”
    

      “Yes, one may well wonder,” said Samoylenko. “He sits
      from morning till night, he’s always at work. He works to pay off
      his debts. And he lives, brother, worse than a beggar!”
    

      Half a minute of silence followed. The zoologist, the doctor, and the
      deacon stood at the window and went on looking at Laevsky.
    

      “So he didn’t get away from here, poor fellow,” said
      Samoylenko. “Do you remember how hard he tried?”
    

      “Yes, he has put a screw on himself,” Von Koren repeated.
      “His marriage, the way he works all day long for his daily bread, a
      new expression in his face, and even in his walk—it’s all so
      extraordinary that I don’t know what to call it.”
    

      The zoologist took Samoylenko’s sleeve and went on with emotion in
      his voice:
    

      “You tell him and his wife that when I went away I was full of
      admiration for them and wished them all happiness . . . and I beg him, if
      he can, not to remember evil against me. He knows me. He knows that if I
      could have foreseen this change, then I might have become his best friend.”
    

      “Go in and say good-bye to him.”
    

      “No, that wouldn’t do.”
    

      “Why? God knows, perhaps you’ll never see him again.”
    

      The zoologist reflected, and said:
    

      “That’s true.”
    

      Samoylenko tapped softly at the window. Laevsky started and looked round.
    

      “Vanya, Nikolay Vassilitch wants to say goodbye to you,” said
      Samoylenko. “He is just going away.”
    

      Laevsky got up from the table, and went into the passage to open the door.
      Samoylenko, the zoologist, and the deacon went into the house.
    

      “I can only come for one minute,” began the zoologist, taking
      off his goloshes in the passage, and already wishing he had not given way
      to his feelings and come in, uninvited. “It is as though I were
      forcing myself on him,” he thought, “and that’s stupid.”
    

      “Forgive me for disturbing you,” he said as he went into the
      room with Laevsky, “but I’m just going away, and I had an
      impulse to see you. God knows whether we shall ever meet again.”
    

      “I am very glad to see you. . . . Please come in,” said
      Laevsky, and he awkwardly set chairs for his visitors as though he wanted
      to bar their way, and stood in the middle of the room, rubbing his hands.
    

      “I should have done better to have left my audience in the street,”
      thought Von Koren, and he said firmly: “Don’t remember evil
      against me, Ivan Andreitch. To forget the past is, of course, impossible
      —it is too painful, and I’ve not come here to apologise or to
      declare that I was not to blame. I acted sincerely, and I have not changed
      my convictions since then. . . . It is true that I see, to my great
      delight, that I was mistaken in regard to you, but it’s easy to make
      a false step even on a smooth road, and, in fact, it’s the natural
      human lot: if one is not mistaken in the main, one is mistaken in the
      details. Nobody knows the real truth.”
    

      “No, no one knows the truth,” said Laevsky.
    

      “Well, good-bye. . . . God give you all happiness.”
    

      Von Koren gave Laevsky his hand; the latter took it and bowed.
    

      “Don’t remember evil against me,” said Von Koren.
      “Give my greetings to your wife, and say I am very sorry not to say
      good-bye to her.”
    

      “She is at home.”
    

      Laevsky went to the door of the next room, and said:
    

      “Nadya, Nikolay Vassilitch wants to say goodbye to you.”
    

      Nadyezhda Fyodorovna came in; she stopped near the doorway and looked
      shyly at the visitors. There was a look of guilt and dismay on her face,
      and she held her hands like a schoolgirl receiving a scolding.
    

      “I’m just going away, Nadyezhda Fyodorovna,” said Von
      Koren, “and have come to say good-bye.”
    

      She held out her hand uncertainly, while Laevsky bowed.
    

      “What pitiful figures they are, though!” thought Von Koren.
      “The life they are living does not come easy to them. I shall be in
      Moscow and Petersburg; can I send you anything?” he asked.
    

      “Oh!” said Nadyezhda Fyodorovna, and she looked anxiously at
      her husband. “I don’t think there’s anything. . . .”
    

      “No, nothing . . .” said Laevsky, rubbing his hands. “Our
      greetings.”
    

      Von Koren did not know what he could or ought to say, though as he went in
      he thought he would say a very great deal that would be warm and good and
      important. He shook hands with Laevsky and his wife in silence, and left
      them with a depressed feeling.
    

      “What people!” said the deacon in a low voice, as he walked
      behind them. “My God, what people! Of a truth, the right hand of God
      has planted this vine! Lord! Lord! One man vanquishes thousands and
      another tens of thousands. Nikolay Vassilitch,” he said
      ecstatically, “let me tell you that to-day you have conquered the
      greatest of man’s enemies—pride.”
    

      “Hush, deacon! Fine conquerors we are! Conquerors ought to look like
      eagles, while he’s a pitiful figure, timid, crushed; he bows like a
      Chinese idol, and I, I am sad. . . .”
    

      They heard steps behind them. It was Laevsky, hurrying after them to see
      him off. The orderly was standing on the quay with the two portmanteaus,
      and at a little distance stood four boatmen.
    

      “There is a wind, though. . . . Brrr!” said Samoylenko.
      “There must be a pretty stiff storm on the sea now! You are not
      going off at a nice time, Koyla.”
    

      “I’m not afraid of sea-sickness.”
    

      “That’s not the point. . . . I only hope these rascals won’t
      upset you. You ought to have crossed in the agent’s sloop. Where’s
      the agent’s sloop?” he shouted to the boatmen.
    

      “It has gone, Your Excellency.”
    

      “And the Customs-house boat?”
    

      “That’s gone, too.”
    

      “Why didn’t you let us know,” said Samoylenko angrily.
      “You dolts!”
    

      “It’s all the same, don’t worry yourself . . .”
      said Von Koren. “Well, good-bye. God keep you.”
    

      Samoylenko embraced Von Koren and made the sign of the cross over him
      three times.
    

      “Don’t forget us, Kolya. . . . Write. . . . We shall look out
      for you next spring.”
    

      “Good-bye, deacon,” said Von Koren, shaking hands with the
      deacon. “Thank you for your company and for your pleasant
      conversation. Think about the expedition.”
    

      “Oh Lord, yes! to the ends of the earth,” laughed the deacon.
      “I’ve nothing against it.”
    

      Von Koren recognised Laevsky in the darkness, and held out his hand
      without speaking. The boatmen were by now below, holding the boat, which
      was beating against the piles, though the breakwater screened it from the
      breakers. Von Koren went down the ladder, jumped into the boat, and sat at
      the helm.
    

      “Write!” Samoylenko shouted to him. “Take care of
      yourself.”
    

      “No one knows the real truth,” thought Laevsky, turning up the
      collar of his coat and thrusting his hands into his sleeves.
    

      The boat turned briskly out of the harbour into the open sea. It vanished
      in the waves, but at once from a deep hollow glided up onto a high
      breaker, so that they could distinguish the men and even the oars. The
      boat moved three yards forward and was sucked two yards back.
    

      “Write!” shouted Samoylenko; “it’s devilish
      weather for you to go in.”
    

      “Yes, no one knows the real truth . . .” thought Laevsky,
      looking wearily at the dark, restless sea.
    

      “It flings the boat back,” he thought; “she makes two
      steps forward and one step back; but the boatmen are stubborn, they work
      the oars unceasingly, and are not afraid of the high waves. The boat goes
      on and on. Now she is out of sight, but in half an hour the boatmen will
      see the steamer lights distinctly, and within an hour they will be by the
      steamer ladder. So it is in life. . . . In the search for truth man makes
      two steps forward and one step back. Suffering, mistakes, and weariness of
      life thrust them back, but the thirst for truth and stubborn will drive
      them on and on. And who knows? Perhaps they will reach the real truth at
      last.”
    

      “Go—o—od-by—e,” shouted Samoylenko.
    

      “There’s no sight or sound of them,” said the deacon.
      “Good luck on the journey!”
    

      It began to spot with rain.