WAITER, A “BOCK”
    

      Why did I go into that beer hall on that particular evening? I do not
      know. It was cold; a fine rain, a flying mist, veiled the gas lamps with a
      transparent fog, made the side walks reflect the light that streamed from
      the shop windows—lighting up the soft slush and the muddy feet of
      the passers-by.
    

      I was going nowhere in particular; was simply having a short walk after
      dinner. I had passed the Credit Lyonnais, the Rue Vivienne, and several
      other streets. I suddenly descried a large beer hall which was more than
      half full. I walked inside, with no object in view. I was not the least
      thirsty.
    

      I glanced round to find a place that was not too crowded, and went and sat
      down by the side of a man who seemed to me to be old, and who was smoking
      a two-sous clay pipe, which was as black as coal. From six to eight
      glasses piled up on the table in front of him indicated the number of
      “bocks” he had already absorbed. At a glance I recognized a
      “regular,” one of those frequenters of beer houses who come in
      the morning when the place opens, and do not leave till evening when it is
      about to close. He was dirty, bald on top of his head, with a fringe of
      iron-gray hair falling on the collar of his frock coat. His clothes, much
      too large for him, appeared to have been made for him at a time when he
      was corpulent. One could guess that he did not wear suspenders, for he
      could not take ten steps without having to stop to pull up his trousers.
      Did he wear a vest? The mere thought of his boots and of that which they
      covered filled me with horror. The frayed cuffs were perfectly black at
      the edges, as were his nails.
    

      As soon as I had seated myself beside him, this individual said to me in a
      quiet tone of voice:
    

      “How goes it?”
    

      I turned sharply round and closely scanned his features, whereupon he
      continued:
    

      “I see you do not recognize me.”
    

      “No, I do not.”
    

      “Des Barrets.”
    

      I was stupefied. It was Count Jean des Barrets, my old college chum.
    

      I seized him by the hand, and was so dumbfounded that I could find nothing
      to say. At length I managed to stammer out:
    

      “And you, how goes it with you?”
    

      He responded placidly:
    

      “I get along as I can.”
    

      “What are you doing now?” I asked.
    

      “You see what I am doing,” he answered quit resignedly.
    

      I felt my face getting red. I insisted:
    

      “But every day?”
    

      “Every day it is the same thing,” was his reply, accompanied
      with a thick puff of tobacco smoke.
    

      He then tapped with a sou on the top of the marble table, to attract the
      attention of the waiter, and called out:
    

      “Waiter, two 'bocks.'”
    

      A voice in the distance repeated:
    

      “Two bocks for the fourth table.”
    

      Another voice, more distant still, shouted out:
    

      “Here they are!”
    

      Immediately a man with a white apron appeared, carrying two “bocks,”
      which he set down, foaming, on the table, spilling some of the yellow
      liquid on the sandy floor in his haste.
    

      Des Barrets emptied his glass at a single draught and replaced it on the
      table, while he sucked in the foam that had been left on his mustache. He
      next asked:
    

      “What is there new?”
    

      I really had nothing new to tell him. I stammered:
    

      “Nothing, old man. I am a business man.”
    

      In his monotonous tone of voice he said:
    

      “Indeed, does it amuse you?”
    

      “No, but what can I do? One must do something!”
    

      “Why should one?”
    

      “So as to have occupation.”
    

      “What's the use of an occupation? For my part, I do nothing at all,
      as you see, never anything. When one has not a sou I can understand why
      one should work. But when one has enough to live on, what's the use? What
      is the good of working? Do you work for yourself, or for others? If you
      work for yourself, you do it for your own amusement, which is all right;
      if you work for others, you are a fool.”
    

      Then, laying his pipe on the marble table, he called out anew:
    

      “Waiter, a 'bock.'” And continued: “It makes me thirsty
      to keep calling so. I am not accustomed to that sort of thing. Yes, yes, I
      do nothing. I let things slide, and I am growing old. In dying I shall
      have nothing to regret. My only remembrance will be this beer hall. No
      wife, no children, no cares, no sorrows, nothing. That is best.”
    

      He then emptied the glass which had been brought him, passed his tongue
      over his lips, and resumed his pipe.
    

      I looked at him in astonishment, and said:
    

      “But you have not always been like that?”
    

      “Pardon me; ever since I left college.”
    

      “That is not a proper life to lead, my dear fellow; it is simply
      horrible. Come, you must have something to do, you must love something,
      you must have friends.”
    

      “No, I get up at noon, I come here, I have my breakfast, I drink my
      beer, I remain until the evening, I have my dinner, I drink beer. Then
      about half-past one in the morning, I go home to bed, because the place
      closes up; that annoys me more than anything. In the last ten years I have
      passed fully six years on this bench, in my corner; and the other four in
      my bed, nowhere else. I sometimes chat with the regular customers.”
    

      “But when you came to Paris what did you do at first?”
    

      “I paid my devoirs to the Cafe de Medicis.”
    

      “What next?”
    

      “Next I crossed the water and came here.”
    

      “Why did you take that trouble?”
    

      “What do you mean? One cannot remain all one's life in the Latin
      Quarter. The students make too much noise. Now I shall not move again.
      Waiter, a 'bock.'”
    

      I began to think that he was making fun of me, and I continued:
    

      “Come now, be frank. You have been the victim of some great sorrow;
      some disappointment in love, no doubt! It is easy to see that you are a
      man who has had some trouble. What age are you?”
    

      “I am thirty, but I look forty-five, at least.”
    

      I looked him straight in the face. His wrinkled, ill-shaven face gave one
      the impression that he was an old man. On the top of his head a few long
      hairs waved over a skin of doubtful cleanliness. He had enormous
      eyelashes, a heavy mustache, and a thick beard. Suddenly I had a kind of
      vision, I know not why, of a basin filled with dirty water in which all
      that hair had been washed. I said to him:
    

      “You certainly look older than your age. You surely must have
      experienced some great sorrow.”
    

      He replied:
    

      “I tell you that I have not. I am old because I never go out into
      the air. Nothing makes a man deteriorate more than the life of a cafe.”
    

      I still could not believe him.
    

      “You must surely also have been married? One could not get as
      bald-headed as you are without having been in love.”
    

      He shook his head, shaking dandruff down on his coat as he did so.
    

      “No, I have always been virtuous.”
    

      And, raising his eyes toward the chandelier which heated our heads, he
      said:
    

      “If I am bald, it is the fault of the gas. It destroys the hair.
      Waiter, a 'bock.' Are you not thirsty?”
    

      “No, thank you. But you really interest me. Since when have you been
      so morbid? Your life is not normal, it is not natural. There is something
      beneath it all.”
    

      “Yes, and it dates from my infancy. I received a great shock when I
      was very young, and that turned my life into darkness which will last to
      the end.”
    

      “What was it?”
    

      “You wish to know about it? Well, then, listen. You recall, of
      course, the castle in which I was brought up, for you used to spend five
      or six months there during vacation. You remember that large gray
      building, in the middle of a great park, and the long avenues of oaks
      which opened to the four points of the compass. You remember my father and
      mother, both of whom were ceremonious, solemn, and severe.
    

      “I worshipped my mother; I was afraid of my father; but I respected
      both, accustomed always as I was to see every one bow before them. They
      were Monsieur le Comte and Madame la Comtesse to all the country round,
      and our neighbors, the Tannemares, the Ravelets, the Brennevilles, showed
      them the utmost consideration.
    

      “I was then thirteen years old. I was happy, pleased with
      everything, as one is at that age, full of the joy of life.
    

      “Well, toward the end of September, a few days before returning to
      college, as I was playing about in the shrubbery of the park, among the
      branches and leaves, as I was crossing a path, I saw my father and mother,
      who were walking along.
    

      “I recall it as though it were yesterday. It was a very windy day.
      The whole line of trees swayed beneath the gusts of wind, groaning, and
      seeming to utter cries-those dull, deep cries that forests give out during
      a tempest.
    

      “The falling leaves, turning yellow, flew away like birds, circling
      and falling, and then running along the path like swift animals.
    

      “Evening came on. It was dark in the thickets. The motion of the
      wind and of the branches excited me, made me tear about as if I were
      crazy, and howl in imitation of the wolves.
    

      “As soon as I perceived my parents, I crept furtively toward them,
      under the branches, in order to surprise them, as though I had been a
      veritable prowler. But I stopped in fear a few paces from them. My father,
      who was in a terrible passion, cried:
    

      “'Your mother is a fool; moreover, it is not a question of your
      mother. It is you. I tell you that I need this money, and I want you to
      sign this.'
    

      “My mother replied in a firm voice:
    

      “'I will not sign it. It is Jean's fortune. I shall guard it for him
      and I will not allow you to squander it with strange women, as you have
      your own heritage.'
    

      “Then my father, trembling with rage, wheeled round and, seizing his
      wife by the throat, began to slap her with all his might full in the face
      with his disengaged hand.
    

      “My mother's hat fell off, her hair became loosened and fell over
      her shoulders; she tried to parry the blows, but she could not do so. And
      my father, like a madman, kept on striking her. My mother rolled over on
      the ground, covering her face with her hands. Then he turned her over on
      her back in order to slap her still more, pulling away her hands, which
      were covering her face.
    

      “As for me, my friend, it seemed as though the world was coming to
      an end, that the eternal laws had changed. I experienced the overwhelming
      dread that one has in presence of things supernatural, in presence of
      irreparable disasters. My childish mind was bewildered, distracted. I
      began to cry with all my might, without knowing why; a prey to a fearful
      dread, sorrow, and astonishment. My father heard me, turned round, and, on
      seeing me, started toward me. I believe that he wanted to kill me, and I
      fled like a hunted animal, running straight ahead into the thicket.
    

      “I ran perhaps for an hour, perhaps for two. I know not. Darkness
      set in. I sank on the grass, exhausted, and lay there dismayed, frantic
      with fear, and devoured by a sorrow capable of breaking forever the heart
      of a poor child. I was cold, hungry, perhaps. At length day broke. I was
      afraid to get up, to walk, to return home, to run farther, fearing to
      encounter my father, whom I did not wish to see again.
    

      “I should probably have died of misery and of hunger at the foot of
      a tree if the park guard had not discovered me and led me home by force.
    

      “I found my parents looking as usual. My mother alone spoke to me
      “'How you frightened me, you naughty boy. I lay awake the whole
      night.'
    

      “I did not answer, but began to weep. My father did not utter a
      single word.
    

      “Eight days later I returned to school.
    

      “Well, my friend, it was all over with me. I had witnessed the other
      side of things, the bad side. I have not been able to perceive the good
      side since that day. What has taken place in my mind, what strange
      phenomenon has warped my ideas, I do not know. But I no longer had a taste
      for anything, a wish for anything, a love for anybody, a desire for
      anything whatever, any ambition, or any hope. And I always see my poor
      mother on the ground, in the park, my father beating her. My mother died
      some years later; my, father still lives. I have not seen him since.
      Waiter, a 'bock.'”
    

      A waiter brought him his “bock,” which he swallowed at a gulp.
      But, in taking up his pipe again, trembling as he was, he broke it.
      “Confound it!” he said, with a gesture of annoyance. “That
      is a real sorrow. It will take me a month to color another!”
    

      And he called out across the vast hall, now reeking with smoke and full of
      men drinking, his everlasting: “Garcon, un 'bock'—and a new
      pipe.”