WATCHES OF THE NIGHT.

 What is in the Brahmin's books that is in the Brahmin's heart.
   Neither you nor I knew there was so much evil in the world.
        —Hindu Proverb.

 This began in a practical joke; but it has gone far enough now, and is
      getting serious.

 Platte, the Subaltern, being poor, had a Waterbury watch and a plain
      leather guard.

 The Colonel had a Waterbury watch also, and for guard, the lip-strap of a
      curb-chain. Lip-straps make the best watch guards.

 They are strong and short. Between a lip-strap and an ordinary leather
      guard there is no great difference; between one Waterbury watch and
      another there is none at all. Every one in the station knew the Colonel's
      lip-strap. He was not a horsey man, but he liked people to believe he had
      been one once; and he wove fantastic stories of the hunting-bridle to
      which this particular lip-strap had belonged. Otherwise he was painfully
      religious.

 Platte and the Colonel were dressing at the Club—both late for their
      engagements, and both in a hurry. That was Kismet. The two watches were on
      a shelf below the looking-glass—guards hanging down. That was
      carelessness. Platte changed first, snatched a watch, looked in the glass,
      settled his tie, and ran. Forty seconds later, the Colonel did exactly the
      same thing; each man taking the other's watch.

 You may have noticed that many religious people are deeply suspicious.
      They seem—for purely religious purposes, of course—to know
      more about iniquity than the Unregenerate. Perhaps they were specially bad
      before they became converted! At any rate, in the imputation of things
      evil, and in putting the worst construction on things innocent, a certain
      type of good people may be trusted to surpass all others. The Colonel and
      his Wife were of that type. But the Colonel's Wife was the worst. She
      manufactured the Station scandal, and—TALKED TO HER AYAH! Nothing
      more need be said. The Colonel's Wife broke up the Laplaces's home. The
      Colonel's Wife stopped the Ferris-Haughtrey engagement. The Colonel's Wife
      induced young Buxton to keep his wife down in the Plains through the first
      year of the marriage. Whereby little Mrs.

 Buxton died, and the baby with her. These things will be remembered
      against the Colonel's Wife so long as there is a regiment in the country.

 But to come back to the Colonel and Platte. They went their several ways
      from the dressing-room. The Colonel dined with two Chaplains, while Platte
      went to a bachelor-party, and whist to follow.

 Mark how things happen! If Platte's sais had put the new saddle-pad on the
      mare, the butts of the terrets would not have worked through the worn
      leather, and the old pad into the mare's withers, when she was coming home
      at two o'clock in the morning. She would not have reared, bolted, fallen
      into a ditch, upset the cart, and sent Platte flying over an aloe-hedge on
      to Mrs. Larkyn's well-kept lawn; and this tale would never have been
      written. But the mare did all these things, and while Platte was rolling
      over and over on the turf, like a shot rabbit, the watch and guard flew
      from his waistcoat—as an Infantry Major's sword hops out of the
      scabbard when they are firing a feu de joie—and rolled and rolled in
      the moonlight, till it stopped under a window.

 Platte stuffed his handkerchief under the pad, put the cart straight, and
      went home.

 Mark again how Kismet works! This would not happen once in a hundred
      years. Towards the end of his dinner with the two Chaplains, the Colonel
      let out his waistcoat and leaned over the table to look at some Mission
      Reports. The bar of the watch-guard worked through the buttonhole, and the
      watch—Platte's watch—slid quietly on to the carpet. Where the
      bearer found it next morning and kept it.

 Then the Colonel went home to the wife of his bosom; but the driver of the
      carriage was drunk and lost his way. So the Colonel returned at an
      unseemly hour and his excuses were not accepted. If the Colonel's Wife had
      been an ordinary “vessel of wrath appointed for destruction,” she would
      have known that when a man stays away on purpose, his excuse is always
      sound and original. The very baldness of the Colonel's explanation proved
      its truth.

 See once more the workings of Kismet! The Colonel's watch which came with
      Platte hurriedly on to Mrs. Larkyn's lawn, chose to stop just under Mrs.
      Larkyn's window, where she saw it early in the morning, recognized it, and
      picked it up. She had heard the crash of Platte's cart at two o'clock that
      morning, and his voice calling the mare names. She knew Platte and liked
      him. That day she showed him the watch and heard his story. He put his
      head on one side, winked and said:—“How disgusting! Shocking old
      man! with his religious training, too! I should send the watch to the
      Colonel's Wife and ask for explanations.”

 Mrs. Larkyn thought for a minute of the Laplaces—whom she had known
      when Laplace and his wife believed in each other—and answered:—“I
      will send it. I think it will do her good. But remember, we must NEVER
      tell her the truth.”

 Platte guessed that his own watch was in the Colonel's possession, and
      thought that the return of the lip-strapped Waterbury with a soothing note
      from Mrs. Larkyn, would merely create a small trouble for a few minutes.
      Mrs. Larkyn knew better. She knew that any poison dropped would find good
      holding-ground in the heart of the Colonel's Wife.

 The packet, and a note containing a few remarks on the Colonel's
      calling-hours, were sent over to the Colonel's Wife, who wept in her own
      room and took counsel with herself.

 If there was one woman under Heaven whom the Colonel's Wife hated with
      holy fervor, it was Mrs. Larkyn. Mrs. Larkyn was a frivolous lady, and
      called the Colonel's Wife “old cat.” The Colonel's Wife said that somebody
      in Revelations was remarkably like Mrs. Larkyn.

 She mentioned other Scripture people as well. From the Old Testament. [But
      the Colonel's Wife was the only person who cared or dared to say anything
      against Mrs. Larkyn. Every one else accepted her as an amusing, honest
      little body.] Wherefore, to believe that her husband had been shedding
      watches under that “Thing's” window at ungodly hours, coupled with the
      fact of his late arrival on the previous night, was.....

 At this point she rose up and sought her husband. He denied everything
      except the ownership of the watch. She besought him, for his Soul's sake,
      to speak the truth. He denied afresh, with two bad words. Then a stony
      silence held the Colonel's Wife, while a man could draw his breath five
      times.

 The speech that followed is no affair of mine or yours. It was made up of
      wifely and womanly jealousy; knowledge of old age and sunken cheeks; deep
      mistrust born of the text that says even little babies' hearts are as bad
      as they make them; rancorous hatred of Mrs. Larkyn, and the tenets of the
      creed of the Colonel's Wife's upbringing.

 Over and above all, was the damning lip-strapped Waterbury, ticking away
      in the palm of her shaking, withered hand. At that hour, I think, the
      Colonel's Wife realized a little of the restless suspicions she had
      injected into old Laplace's mind, a little of poor Miss Haughtrey's
      misery, and some of the canker that ate into Buxton's heart as he watched
      his wife dying before his eyes. The Colonel stammered and tried to
      explain. Then he remembered that his watch had disappeared; and the
      mystery grew greater. The Colonel's Wife talked and prayed by turns till
      she was tired, and went away to devise means for “chastening the stubborn
      heart of her husband.” Which translated, means, in our slang,
      “tail-twisting.”

 You see, being deeply impressed with the doctrine of Original Sin, she
      could not believe in the face of appearances. She knew too much, and
      jumped to the wildest conclusions.

 But it was good for her. It spoilt her life, as she had spoilt the life of
      the Laplaces. She had lost her faith in the Colonel, and—here the
      creed suspicion came in—he might, she argued, have erred many times,
      before a merciful Providence, at the hands of so unworthy an instrument as
      Mrs. Larkyn, had established his guilt.

 He was a bad, wicked, gray-haired profligate. This may sound too sudden a
      revulsion for a long-wedded wife; but it is a venerable fact that, if a
      man or woman makes a practice of, and takes a delight in, believing and
      spreading evil of people indifferent to him or her, he or she will end in
      believing evil of folk very near and dear. You may think, also, that the
      mere incident of the watch was too small and trivial to raise this
      misunderstanding. It is another aged fact that, in life as well as racing,
      all the worst accidents happen at little ditches and cut-down fences. In
      the same way, you sometimes see a woman who would have made a Joan of Arc
      in another century and climate, threshing herself to pieces over all the
      mean worry of housekeeping. But that is another story.

 Her belief only made the Colonel's Wife more wretched, because it insisted
      so strongly on the villainy of men. Remembering what she had done, it was
      pleasant to watch her unhappiness, and the penny-farthing attempts she
      made to hide it from the Station. But the Station knew and laughed
      heartlessly; for they had heard the story of the watch, with much dramatic
      gesture, from Mrs. Larkyn's lips.

 Once or twice Platte said to Mrs. Larkyn, seeing that the Colonel had not
      cleared himself:—“This thing has gone far enough. I move we tell the
      Colonel's Wife how it happened.” Mrs. Larkyn shut her lips and shook her
      head, and vowed that the Colonel's Wife must bear her punishment as best
      she could. Now Mrs. Larkyn was a frivolous woman, in whom none would have
      suspected deep hate. So Platte took no action, and came to believe
      gradually, from the Colonel's silence, that the Colonel must have “run off
      the line” somewhere that night, and, therefore, preferred to stand
      sentence on the lesser count of rambling into other people's compounds out
      of calling hours. Platte forgot about the watch business after a while,
      and moved down-country with his regiment. Mrs. Larkyn went home when her
      husband's tour of Indian service expired. She never forgot.

 But Platte was quite right when he said that the joke had gone too far.
      The mistrust and the tragedy of it—which we outsiders cannot see and
      do not believe in—are killing the Colonel's Wife, and are making the
      Colonel wretched. If either of them read this story, they can depend upon
      its being a fairly true account of the case, and can “kiss and make
      friends.”

 Shakespeare alludes to the pleasure of watching an Engineer being shelled
      by his own Battery. Now this shows that poets should not write about what
      they do not understand. Any one could have told him that Sappers and
      Gunners are perfectly different branches of the Service. But, if you
      correct the sentence, and substitute Gunner for Sapper, the moral comes
      just the same.