WHEN PIPPA PASSED

 Mr. Delafield, stepping comfortably forth
from his club, had dined especially well, and was
in a correspondingly good humour. As the brisk
March wind swept across the corner just in front
of him, he meanwhile settling his glossy hat more
firmly on a fine, close-clipped grey head, a sudden
kindly impulse, not entirely usual with him,
sent him bending to his knee to pick up the fugitive
slip of white, scribbled foolscap that fluttered
by him, hotly pursued by a slender young man.

 "Thanks. Oh, thanks!" murmured the pursuer,
as Delafield, with a courteous inclination of the
head, tendered the captured slip.

 "Not at all." A consciousness of the boy's quick
panting, his anxious tug at the paper, actually
an almost audible beating of the heart, drew the
older man to look carefully at him. A white, oval
face, drooping mouth, black, deep-set eyes that
fairly burned into his, compelled attention.

  "Important paper, I suppose?" he inquired
lightly. "Wouldn't want to lose it."

 "No—oh, no!"

 "Get a wigging at the office?"

 "It—it's not—they are my own—it is a poem!"
stammered the young man.

 Delafield chuckled involuntarily, and then, as a
quick red poured over the other's cheeks, he made
a hasty gesture of apology.

 "No offence—none at all, I assure you, Mr.—Mr.
Poet! I was only taken by surprise. One
doesn't often assist a poet in catching his works!"
He laughed again, a contented after-dinner
laugh.

 Then, as the young man fell behind him quietly,
the incident being over, an idle desire for company
prompted him to delay his own pace.

 "Do you write much? Get it printed? Good
publisher?" he inquired genially. Few persons
could resist Lester Delafield's smile: his very butler
warmed to it, and the woman who retained her
reserve under it he had never met.

 Again the young man blushed. "Published? No, sir; I never dared to see—I don't know if it's
worth being printed," he said.

 "But you think it's pretty good, eh? I'll bet
you do. I used to. Let me see it. I'll tell you if
it's worth anything."

 They had turned into a quieter cross-street; the
wind had passed them by. Standing under a street-light,
benevolently amused at his impulse, Delafield
tucked his stick under his arm, uncreased the
paper, and noted the title of the poem aloud: To
the Moon in a Stormy Night. His eyebrows lifted;
he glanced quizzically at the young man, but met
such an earnest, searching look, so restrained, yet
so quivering, so terrified, yet so brave, that his
heart softened and he read on in silence.

 A minute passed, two, three, and four. The man
read silently, the boy waited breathless in suspense.
The noisy, crowding city seemed to sweep by them,
leaving them stranded on this little point of time.

 Mr. Delafield raised his eyes and regarded the
boy thoughtfully.

 "You say you wrote this?" he demanded.

 "Yes, sir."

  "When did you write it?"

 "Last night."

 "Have you any more like it?"

 "I don't know if it's like it. I've got quite a
good deal more. What do you——" He could get
no further. Drops of perspiration started from
his forehead. His mouth was drawn flat with
anxiety.

 "This poetry," said Delafield, with a carefully
impersonal calm, "is very good. It is remarkably
good. It is stunning, in fact. ' And moored at last
in some pale bay of dawn '—why did you stop
there? Isn't that rather abrupt?"

 "That was when it ended. Do you really
think——"

 "I don't think anything about it. I know. You
have a future before you, my young friend. I
should like to see—Good Lord, what is it?"

 For the boy had twined his arms around the
lamp-post and was slowly sinking to the pavement.
His face was ghastly white. Delafield
grasped his arm, and as their eyes met, the older
man drew a quick breath and scowled.

  "It's not because—you're not—when did you
have your lunch?" he demanded shortly.

 The boy smiled weakly.

 "And your breakfast?"

 "Oh, I had that —quite a little—really I did!"
he half whispered.

 Delafield got him on his feet and around the
corner to a restaurant. As they entered, the smell
of the food weakened him again, and he staggered
against his friend, begging his pardon helplessly.

 "Soup—and hurry it up, it's immaterial what
kind," the host commanded.

 As the boy gulped it down he made out a further
order, and while the hot meat, vegetables, and
bread vanished and the strong, brown coffee lowered
in the cup, he lighted a long cigar and talked
with a quiet insistence. Later, when his guest
blinked drowsily behind a cloud of cigarette
smoke, he asked questions, marvelling at the simple
replies.

 The boy's name was Henry West; it was twenty-two
years since he had made his appearance in a
family already large enough to regard his advent with a stoical endurance. His people all worked in
the mills in Lowell; he, too, till the noise and jar
gave him racking headaches. He made his first
verses in the mill. He had come to New York to
learn to be a clerk in a corner drug-store kept by
a distant cousin, but he couldn't seem to learn the
business. The names of the things were hard to
remember. His cousin said he was absent-minded.

 And he had to read everything that was in sight:
if a thing was printed he seemed to have to read
it. He read books from the library and the night-school
when his cousin thought he was polishing
the soda-fountain. Of all the things he hated—and
they were many—the soda-fountain was the
worst. He wanted to study a great deal, but only
the studies he liked. Not algebra and geometry,
nor chemistry that made his head ache, but history
and poetry and French. He thought he
would like to know Italian, too. The family supposed
he was still in the drug-store, but he had
quarrelled with his cousin and left it a month ago.
He stayed mostly in the library and helped the
janitor with sweeping and airing the rooms. The janitor paid him a little to ease his own hours of
night-watching, and often asked him to supper.
He read nearly all day and wrote at night. It was
better than the mills or the drug-store. He supposed
he was lazy—his family always said he
was.

 "Come to this address to-morrow afternoon and
bring the rest of your poetry with you," said
Delafield, "I have an engagement at nine. May I
keep this one till you come?"—he shook the foolscap
significantly. The boy hesitated, almost imperceptibly,
then nodded. As Delafield left the
little table he did not rise with him, but sat with
his eyes fixed on the smoke-rings.

 "They do not teach courtesy in the night-schools,
evidently," mused the older man, peering
for a cab; "but one can't have everything. My
manners have been on occasion commended—but I
can't write poetry like that."

 He tasted in advance the pleasure of reading
the poem to Anne: how her brown eyes would
dilate and glow, how eagerly her long, slender fingers
would clasp and unclasp. People called her cold, they told him; for his part he never could
see why. True, she was not kittenish, like the other
nieces; she didn't try to flirt with her old uncle, as
Ellen's girls did; but what an enthusiasm for fine
things, what a quick, keen mind the child had!
Child—Anne was twenty-five by now. Was it true
that she might never marry? Ellen said—but then
Ellen was always a little jealous of poor Anne's
money. The girl couldn't help her legacies. Still,
at twenty-five—perhaps it was true that she expected
too much, thought too seriously, reasoned
morbidly that they were after her money.

 Seated opposite her in his favourite oak chair,
looking with a sudden impersonal appraisal at the
slender figure in clinging black lace, the cool pallor
of the face under the smooth dark hair, the
rope of pearls that hung from her firm, girlish
shoulders, it dawned on him that there was something
wanting in this not quite sufficiently charming
piece of womanhood. She was too black-and-white,
too unswerving, too unflushed by life.
Humanity, with its countless moulding and colouring
touches, seemed to slip away from either side of her, like the waves from some proud young
prow, and fall behind.

 "Yet she's not unsympathetic—I swear she's
not!" he thought, as her eyes glowed to the poem
and her lips parted delightedly.

 "' And moored at last in some pale bay '—Uncle
Les, isn't that beautiful! Not that it's really so
fine as the first part, but it's easier to remember.
And he was hungry? Oh, oh! And you discovered
him, didn't you?"

 He nodded complacently.

 "I'll bring you around the rest of the things
to-morrow. I knew you'd enjoy this, Anne. You
love—really love—this sort of thing, don't you?"

 She nodded eagerly.

 "But nothing else? Nobody—you don't think
that perhaps you're letting—after all, my dear,
life is something more than the beautiful things
you surround yourself with—pictures and music
and poetry, and all that. It really is. There is so
much——"

 "There is one's religion," she said quietly and
not uncordially. But she had retreated intangibly from him. She sat there, remote as her cold pearls,
as far from the rough, sweet uses of the world as
the priceless china in her cabinets.

 "Oh, yes, of course, there is religion," he answered
listlessly.

 Two days later they sat, all three, in her library,
while West read them his poems. The two looked
at each other in amazement. Where had this untrained
factory boy got it all? What wonderful
voices had sung to him above the whirring of the
wheels; what delicate visions had risen through
the smoky pall of his sordid days? He wrote only
of Nature: the brown brook water in spring;
the pale, hurrying leaves of November; a bird
glimpsed through pink apple-blossoms; the full
river encircling a bending elm. In the vivid swiftness
of effect, the simple subtlety of treatment,
there was a recalling of the Japanese witchery of
suggestion; the faint tinge of sadness in every
poem left in the mind precisely the sweet regret
that the beauty of the world must always leave.
At the "Clearing Shower," perhaps the most compelling
of all his work, quick drops started to the girl's eyes, so intense was the vision of the moist,
green-breathing earth, the torn fleece of the
clouds, the broken chirping of frightened birds,
the softened, yellow light that reassures and saddens
at once. His art was not Wordsworth's nor
Shelley's; it was as if Keats had turned from human
passion and consecrated the beauty of his
verse to the beauty of Nature—but simply, sadly,
and through a veil of Heine's tears.

 Delafield nodded mutely to his niece, then
walked over to the boy.

 "There will be plenty of people to tell you
later," he said, holding out his hand, "but let me
be the first. You are a genius, Mr. West, and your
country will be proud of your work some day.
There is no American to-day writing such poetry."

 West took his hand awkwardly, not rising from
his chair. He fingered his manuscript nervously.

 "I—I wouldn't want to be laughed at," he demurred.
"Other folks mightn't be so kind as you.
If anybody laughed—I—it would just about kill
me!" he concluded, passionately. They smiled sympathetically
at each other.

  "But no one would laugh, I assure you, Mr.
West," Anne murmured, stooping to pick up a
scattered sheet.

 He hardly noticed her. His eyes were fixed constantly
on Delafield: the girl had made no impression
upon him whatever. Nor did the elegance of
the furnishings, the evidences of great wealth
everywhere arouse in him the least apparent curiosity.
Having no knowledge of the many grades
of material prosperity between his own meagre
surroundings and Anne Delafield's luxury, he accepted
the one as he had endured the other, his
mind quite removed from either, his eyes looking
beyond.

 Anne had supposed that her uncle would carry
the poems to one of the leading magazines, but he
pooh-poohed the idea.

 "I think not. We're not going to have the boy
mixed up with the hacks that turn out two or
three inches of rhymes to fill up a page in a magazine,"
he declared. "We'll have D—— drop in
some night and West shall read 'em to him. Then
we'll bring out a book. Here and in England—they'll like him there, or I'm much mistaken."

 In a month it seemed that they had always
known him. Intimacy was so impossible with his inturned,
elusive nature, that to have him sitting
through hours of silence by the birch fire, abstracted,
dreamy, inattentive, except to some
chance word that stirred his fancy, was to know
him well, to all intents. His nerves, dulled to all
great torments like poverty, hunger, obscurity,
quivered like violin strings under little unaccustomed
jarrings. If interrupted in the reading of
his verses he would lose his control beyond belief;
a chance cough, the falling of an ember, put him
out of tune for hours. He possessed little sense of
humour, and the lightest satire turned him sulky.
A child might have teased him to madness; it was
evident to them that his utterly lonely life had
preserved him from constant torture at the hands
of associates.

 Until the book was complete he refused to have
the great publisher brought to hear it read. Sometimes
for days they would not see him, then on some rainy evening he would appear, lonely and
hungry, eager for the praise and warmth of
Anne's library, an exquisite poem in his pocket.
Served to repletion by the secretly scornful butler,
he would smoke a while, then draw out the sheet
of foolscap, and read in his nervous yet musical
voice the latest page of the book that was to bring
him fame.

 On one such night—it was when he brought
them "Dawn on the River," the only poem of
which Anne had a copy, and the one which a well-known
firm afterward printed under his photograph
and sold by thousands at Easter-tide—he
broke through the mist—it was too impalpable to
be called a wall of reserve—that held his personality
apart from them, and talked wonderfully for
an hour. They seemed to see the clear soul of some
gentle, strayed fawn; his thoughts were like summer
clouds mirrored in a placid brook. All the
crowding, sweating humanity of his stunted boyhood
had flowed through his youth like an ugly
drain laid through a fresh mountain stream. He
seemed to have lived all his years with young David on the hillside, and wealth and poverty,
crowds and loneliness, love and death were as far
from his life as if the vast procession of them all
that swept by him daily through the great city
had never been.

 As he talked, Delafield found his eyes drawn
from the boy's face to Anne's. Never before had
he seen just that faint, steady rose in her cheeks,
that sweet glow in her eyes. As she leaned forward,
her very pearls seemed to catch a red tinge from
the fire: it occurred to him for the first time that
she looked like Ellen's girls—there was a suggestion
of Kitty in the curve of her cheek.

 Was it possible that Anne—no, it could not be.
To think of the men that had tried to come into
her life and failed—such men! And this boy, this
elf, to whom no woman was so real or so dear as
a tree in the glen!

 For two weeks after that night he did not come.
Anne never mentioned his name, and Delafield,
doubtful of what that might portend, tried to believe
that she had forgotten him. Toward the end
of the second week she spoke of the completion of his book, and suggested that her uncle should invite
Mr. D——: "Urge Henry to consent to it,"
she added, "he will do anything for you, Uncle
Les."

 "More than for you?" he asked.

 "For me?" She flushed a little. "I doubt if he
distinguishes me from my portrait over the mantel!"

 "And you wish that he would," Delafield wanted
to reply, trying to remember if she had ever called
him "Henry" before.

 On a warm April evening, when the windows
were open to catch the setting sun and the odour
of the blossoming window-boxes, he came at last.
As he stepped into the room, head erect, eyes wide
and bright, they became aware immediately of a
change in him. His glance was more conscious,
more alert, his hand-grasp more assured.

 "You are in time to dine with us," Anne said,
with her grave smile, "we are all alone. Will you
stay?"

 "Thanks, I can't stay, I'm going somewhere
else," he answered quickly.

  "And the new poem?" Delafield inquired, "did
you get it done? That was to be the last, wasn't
it?"

 "Oh! I haven't been writing lately," he explained,
blushing a little. "I've been too busy—that
is, I've been too—I've been thinking of something
else." He stood before them in the full light
of the late day; every expression in his sensitive,
mobile face showed clear.

 "A perfectly wonderful thing has happened,"
he burst out, "you couldn't understand. Nobody
can understand but me, and—and——"

 "Who is she?" said Delafield bluntly.

 "How did you know?" cried the boy, "have you
seen—did she tell——"

 "Of course not. When did it happen?"

 Delafield kept his face persistently from Anne's.
For the world he could not have looked at her.

 "It was last week." West was smiling eagerly
at him, ignoring the woman's presence.

 "I went into the grocer's to do an errand for
Mr. Swazey, and she was behind the little grating—you
pay her. She is the cashier. I didn't take my change, and she had to call me back, and we
dropped it all over the floor. She helped me pick
it up. Oh, if you could see her, Mr. Delafield!"

 "Is she handsome?"

 "She is a perfectly beautiful woman," said the
boy.

 "Dear, dear!" murmured the older man.

 "We are engaged, but her mother objects to
me. In fact—in fact, her mother doesn't know that
she is engaged. She has been engaged before. But
she never really loved the man. Her mother doesn't
care for poetry——"

 At that word, Delafield, with a distinct effort,
connected this babbling druggist's clerk with his
poet of "The Clearing Shower." There could be
no doubt that they were the same person. As in
a dream he listened to the boy.

 "And that's what I dropped in to see about. I
told her mother all you said about me being sure
to be well-off some day, and about the book being
published soon, and her brother, that's Pippa's
uncle——"

 "What name did you say?"

  "Pippa. That's her name. Philippa it is really;
she was named after the daughter of a lady her
mother nursed when she was sick, and so she named
her after this lady's daughter. But she couldn't
say it plain, you see, so she always called herself
Pippa for short, and so they all call her that still.
I suppose you never heard it before—I never did."

 "It is a strange name—for a cashier," said Mr.
Delafield.

 "Yes, indeed. Well, her Uncle Joseph is a stenographer
in a newspaper office, and he knows a
good deal about this sort of thing, and he says
not to publish with the D——s. He says they're
a poky firm and don't advertise enough. If I gave
the book to the L——s they'd push it along, he
says. He says they'd make anything sell. The
D——s wouldn't put up posters on bill-boards,
now, would they?"

 "I suppose not," said Delafield. He felt unaccountably
tired. He had not realised till now how
much his mind had been filled with Henry West
and his poetry, how much he had anticipated introducing
his rare young proteg.

  "And of course I want to do the best for myself——"

 "Of course, beyond a doubt."

 How could a person change so in two weeks?
What had turned that sensitive dreamer into this
bustling young lover?

 "You see, sir, I've got a good many things to
consider," he smiled happily.

 "Certainly, West, I appreciate that. At the
same time I doubt if you will do better with anybody
than you can with Mr. D——. It may be the
L——s wouldn't want your book. It is not what
is known as a popular book, you know. Poetry
appeals to a limited public, and——"

 "Oh, well, it's all right. Only I thought you
might want to know what Uncle Joseph said,
that's all. I must go now," and he turned.

 "Miss Delafield is still here," said her uncle,
coldly.

 "Oh, good-night," West murmured, and left the
room.

 "Is it really he?" Delafield hazarded, hardly
glancing at her. She met his look calmly.

  "At any rate the book is ready, which is the
principal thing, I suppose," she said.

 He found himself illogically wishing she had
resented it more. "It was a mistake," he thought,
"she has no feeling for him."

 Through the weeks that followed they avoided
mentioning his name, and each, trusting that the
other would forget, thought of him in puzzled
silence.

 When he came to them next, toward the end of
May, it seemed for a moment, as he flung himself
into a chair and stared moodily at the empty fireplace,
that his old self had returned. Thin and
shabby, with dark rings under his eyes, he looked
like the boy Delafield had warmed and fed that
cold March night. But his words undeceived them.

 "I shall shoot myself if this doesn't stop," he
said bitterly. Anne started.

 "Here, here, West, none of that," the older man
corrected, sharply. "That's no thing to say—what
is the matter?"

 "It's Pippa," he returned, simply. "She won't
marry me. I'll kill myself if she don't. I can't eat, I can't sleep, I can't think. It cuts into me night
and day. You don't know how it kills me—you
don't know!"

 He writhed like a child in physical pain. His
face was distorted: he made no more effort to conceal
his misery than his delight of weeks ago.
Delafield showed a little of his disgust.

 "Come, come, West," he said, "control yourself.
This is no killing matter. Better men than you
have been thrown over before this. If she won't
have you, take it like a man, and get to work.
It's time your book was under way."

 West stared dully at him.

 "Book? book?" he repeated. "Oh, damn the
book! I'd throw it away this minute to feel her
arms around me! When I think of how we used
to sit in Uncle Joseph's hammock—Oh, I can't
endure it, I can't!"

 He leaned his head on his arms and rocked to
and fro in abject misery.

 "She laughs at me—just laughs at me!" he
moaned. "I'm ashamed to go near them."

 "Keep away, then," said Delafield shortly.

  "I can't!" he fairly sobbed.

 Anne spoke softly from a dim corner:

 "Does she know about the book?"

 "She doesn't care anything about it. She says
I better be getting a job somewhere. I—I would,
if she'd marry me. I'd go to the drug-store!"

 "Oh, no!" she breathed.

 "If only she'd be engaged again," he muttered,
half to himself, "I'd finish the book, and then,
perhaps——" He began to rock again. "But she
won't, she won't!" he wailed.

 "If you will tell me where she lives," said Anne
quietly, and as if the conversation were to the last
degree conventional, "I will go to see her and
talk the matter over. Perhaps she doesn't understand——"

 "My dear Anne! Are you mad?"

 As Delafield spoke, West interrupted:

 "I'd rather Mr. Delafield would go," he said
quickly, "if—if he would. Maybe she'd listen to
you."

 "I will do nothing of the sort," Delafield returned
angrily. "As if anything I could say could compare with Miss Delafield's words! You
are an ungrateful little beast, West. A woman,
like Pippa herself, is the best person to understand
the matter."

 "All right," the boy assented wearily, "only
she isn't like Pippa, not a bit. Pippa's different."

 Anne coloured deeply, and Delafield cursed the
day he met the boy. His niece he did not pretend to
understand.

 The next afternoon, as he chafed in the stuffy
dining-room-parlour of the flat that was Pippa's
home, listening to the quarrelling of a half dozen
children on the dreary little roof-garden below
him as to who should swing in Uncle Joseph's hammock,
he understood her less and less. What did
she expect to gain from this visit? Was she satisfying
her idea of duty or her curiosity? How much
did she care, anyhow?

 A steady murmur of voices came from a room
behind the one he occupied. The afternoon wore
on. He began to grow sleepy.

 At last the door was flung open. Anne, looking
pale and tired, entered the room, followed by a large, handsome girl with a heavy rope of auburn
hair twisted low over her forehead. She had a
frank, vulgar smile, and shallow, red-brown eyes.
In her plump, large-limbed beauty she was like a
well-kept cat. The day was damp and hot, and
her mussed white shirt-waist clung to her broad
curve of shoulder and breast. In her eyes, as she
smiled at him, was the quiet ease of a conscious
beauty. Beside her Anne seemed unimportant.

 "I'm sorry about the book, Mr. Delafield," she
said, with a slow smile. "But I guess you don't
know Henry very well if you think any reasonable
girl would think of marrying him for a minute.
The gentleman I've been keeping company with
some time had a little misunderstanding with me,
and 'twas more or less to spite him, I guess, that
I got engaged to Henry. It never seemed to me
it mattered much either way."

 "You have broken his heart," said Delafield
stiffly.

 She looked vaguely at her short, fat fingers:
her hands were like a baby's in shape.

 "Oh, I don't know," she said. "He's an awful unreasonable fellow, Henry is. He gets into such
tantrums—I don't dare tell him about Mr. Winch—that's
the gentleman I was speaking of. We're
going to be married in the fall. He's in a livery-stable:
I guess you probably noticed it as you came
along Sixth Avenue—Judd and Winch. He's only
junior partner, but he knows as much about running
a real swell funeral as any of the uptown
men—Mr. Judd says so. Henry's afraid of a horse,
you know. It don't seem quite natural for a man
not to know about horses, does it, now?"

 "If you had only waited till his book came out,"
said Delafield tentatively. As he looked at her he
was conscious of a ridiculous satisfaction that such
a fine woman should know her own mind so perfectly.
She was a very complete creature, in her
way. He realised that in this strangely assorted
quartette he and she were involuntarily on one
side of an intangible line, his niece and their unintelligible
proteg on the other.

 "Wait? But I did wait. I waited over a week,"
she explained, "and then I couldn't stand it any
longer. He'd drive me to drink. For one thing, Henry's changed so. When we first knew him he
was really as entertaining a gentleman as I ever
saw—and I've had a great deal of attention. Why,
we'd sit around and laugh till we nearly died, he'd
say such ridiculous things. He was so different.
Ma used to say if he was much funnier she'd think
he'd ought to have a keeper! The way he'd go
on——!"

 Anne had turned her back and was looking
steadily at the room they had left. Pippa and
Delafield might have been alone.

 "But when we got engaged, he seemed to
change, somehow. I don't know if you've noticed
it——"

 Delafield nodded.

 "Well, that's what I mean. I didn't care any
more about him, then. I guess I sort of woke up,"
she laughed into his eyes. "He tires me to death
with how he'll shoot himself," she added; "they
always say that, you know, but they never
do."

 Anne moved toward the door and Delafield followed
her.

  "I must say that I appreciate your position,
Miss—Miss—" he stopped, inquiringly.

 "Cooley—Miss Philippa Cooley," she supplied.
"Of course you do. Ma said she hoped I'd have
too much sense to stand up with a little radish
of a man like that, even if he could support
me!"

 "But I think it was rather hard on all of us
that you should have engaged yourself to him at
all. You must have known how it would end." He
tried to speak reprovingly.

 She threw him a rich glance.

 "Oh, you can't help it sometimes," she murmured.
"He teased so hard—you don't want to
be disagreeable. As I was telling Miss Delafield——"

 "We must go," said Anne, briefly.

 As they drove home, an inexplicable desire to
provoke her, to rouse some warm feeling in her,
mastered him.

 "Your Aunt Ellen would enjoy this deep interest
in the love affairs of an ex-druggist's clerk and a
grocer's cashier," he said lightly.

  "Would she?" Anne returned quietly, and was
ashamed of his freakish impulse.

 When they told him that evening that they had
been able to accomplish nothing he only stared at
them gloomily.

 "I knew it—I knew it," he muttered. "I did a
poem last night—it's the last I shall ever do. You
can put it in the book. It's the best I've done yet."

 Delafield hardly noticed his words as he seized
the poem. What if from this sordid little tragedy
had sprung the very flower of the poet's genius?
He read eagerly. In a moment his face fell. He
stared doubtfully at the boy.

 "Well," said West irritably, "can't you read
it? Give it here—I'll read it to you."

 "You needn't, I can read it well enough."

 "What do you think of it?"

 "I think it's rot," Delafield returned curtly. He
was bitterly disappointed.

 "Rot?" the boy's eyes narrowed. "What d'you
mean?"

 "I mean that this doggerel is utterly unworthy
of you, West, and that you certainly cannot in clude
it in your book. It is the cheapest sentimentalism—good
heavens, can't you see it? Have you
no critical faculty whatever?"

 "Oh, Uncle Lester, don't !" Anne implored.
"Let me see it," and she put out her hand. The
young man struck it away and seized the paper.

 "I won't trouble you with my 'rot' any more,
Mr. Delafield," he said, with a boyish grandiloquence,
"we'll see what other people have to say
about it."

 "Here, West, don't go away angry!" the
older man urged, "I shouldn't have been so
harsh. You've done such fine work that I couldn't
bear——"

 "Oh, hush your noise!" West interrupted, brutally,
"neither can I bear! You've driven me to
death between you all—you'll never see me
again!" and he flung out of the room.

 Delafield set his teeth. "This is too much," he
said slowly. "The vulgar little cad! No, I won't
go after him, Anne; let him fume it out himself.
I'll try to ask D—— over next week, just the
same."

  But when Mr. D—— came over, full of pleasant
anticipation, it was only to hear of the shocking
death of the boy, whose photograph, taken
from a cheap gilt locket of Pippa's, he afterward
used over the popular gift-card, "Dawn on the
River."

 "Couldn't even shoot himself like a gentleman,"
said Delafield roughly. "Jumping seven stories—pah!"

 "But the poems—the poems?" urged the publisher,
"surely they——"

 Anne took from the table an oblong tin biscuit-box
and softly lifted the cover.

 "Here are the poems," she said, pointing to a
mass of fine, grey paper-ashes.

 "He sent them to you?"

 Mr. D——'s eyes lighted comprehensively; he
glanced at the girl's white face and inscrutable
dark-ringed eyes with a restrained sympathy.

 "He sent them to my uncle," she replied quietly.