WHO WAS TO BLAME?
    

As my uncle Pyotr
      Demyanitch, a lean, bilious collegiate councillor, exceedingly like a
      stale smoked fish with a stick through it, was getting ready to go to the
      high school, where he taught Latin, he noticed that the corner of his
      grammar was nibbled by mice.
    

      “I say, Praskovya,” he said, going into the kitchen and
      addressing the cook, “how is it we have got mice here? Upon my word!
      yesterday my top hat was nibbled, to-day they have disfigured my Latin
      grammar . . . . At this rate they will soon begin eating my clothes!
    

      “What can I do? I did not bring them in!” answered Praskovya.
    

      “We must do something! You had better get a cat, hadn’t you?”
    

      “I’ve got a cat, but what good is it?”
    

      And Praskovya pointed to the corner where a white kitten, thin as a match,
      lay curled up asleep beside a broom.
    

      “Why is it no good?” asked Pyotr Demyanitch.
    

      “It’s young yet, and foolish. It’s not two months old
      yet.”
    

      “H’m. . . . Then it must be trained. It had much better be
      learning instead of lying there.”
    

      Saying this, Pyotr Demyanitch sighed with a careworn air and went out of
      the kitchen. The kitten raised his head, looked lazily after him, and shut
      his eyes again.
    

      The kitten lay awake thinking. Of what? Unacquainted with real life,
      having no store of accumulated impressions, his mental processes could
      only be instinctive, and he could but picture life in accordance with the
      conceptions that he had inherited, together with his flesh and blood, from
      his ancestors, the tigers (vide Darwin). His thoughts were of the
      nature of day-dreams. His feline imagination pictured something like the
      Arabian desert, over which flitted shadows closely resembling Praskovya,
      the stove, the broom. In the midst of the shadows there suddenly appeared
      a saucer of milk; the saucer began to grow paws, it began moving and
      displayed a tendency to run; the kitten made a bound, and with a thrill of
      blood-thirsty sensuality thrust his claws into it.
    

      When the saucer had vanished into obscurity a piece of meat appeared,
      dropped by Praskovya; the meat ran away with a cowardly squeak, but the
      kitten made a bound and got his claws into it. . . . Everything that rose
      before the imagination of the young dreamer had for its starting-point
      leaps, claws, and teeth. . . The soul of another is darkness, and a cat’s
      soul more than most, but how near the visions just described are to the
      truth may be seen from the following fact: under the influence of his
      day-dreams the kitten suddenly leaped up, looked with flashing eyes at
      Praskovya, ruffled up his coat, and making one bound, thrust his claws
      into the cook’s skirt. Obviously he was born a mouse catcher, a
      worthy son of his bloodthirsty ancestors. Fate had destined him to be the
      terror of cellars, store-rooms and cornbins, and had it not been for
      education . . . we will not anticipate, however.
    

      On his way home from the high school, Pyotr Demyanitch went into a general
      shop and bought a mouse-trap for fifteen kopecks. At dinner he fixed a
      little bit of his rissole on the hook, and set the trap under the sofa,
      where there were heaps of the pupils’ old exercise-books, which
      Praskovya used for various domestic purposes. At six o’clock in the
      evening, when the worthy Latin master was sitting at the table correcting
      his pupils’ exercises, there was a sudden “klop!” so
      loud that my uncle started and dropped his pen. He went at once to the
      sofa and took out the trap. A neat little mouse, the size of a thimble,
      was sniffing the wires and trembling with fear.
    

      “Aha,” muttered Pyotr Demyanitch, and he looked at the mouse
      malignantly, as though he were about to give him a bad mark. “You
      are cau—aught, wretch! Wait a bit! I’ll teach you to eat my
      grammar!”
    

      Having gloated over his victim, Poytr Demyanitch put the mouse-trap on the
      floor and called:
    

      “Praskovya, there’s a mouse caught! Bring the kitten here!
    

      “I’m coming,” responded Praskovya, and a minute later
      she came in with the descendant of tigers in her arms.
    

      “Capital!” said Pyotr Demyanitch, rubbing his hands. “We
      will give him a lesson. . . . Put him down opposite the mouse-trap . . .
      that’s it. . . . Let him sniff it and look at it. . . . That’s
      it. . . .”
    

      The kitten looked wonderingly at my uncle, at his arm-chair, sniffed the
      mouse-trap in bewilderment, then, frightened probably by the glaring
      lamplight and the attention directed to him, made a dash and ran in terror
      to the door.
    

      “Stop!” shouted my uncle, seizing him by the tail, “stop,
      you rascal! He’s afraid of a mouse, the idiot! Look! It’s a
      mouse! Look! Well? Look, I tell you!”
    

      Pyotr Demyanitch took the kitten by the scruff of the neck and pushed him
      with his nose against the mouse-trap.
    

      “Look, you carrion! Take him and hold him, Praskovya. . . . Hold him
      opposite the door of the trap. . . . When I let the mouse out, you let him
      go instantly. . . . Do you hear? . . . Instantly let go! Now!”
    

      My uncle assumed a mysterious expression and lifted the door of the trap.
      . . . The mouse came out irresolutely, sniffed the air, and flew like an
      arrow under the sofa. . . . The kitten on being released darted under the
      table with his tail in the air.
    

      “It has got away! got away!” cried Pyotr Demyanitch, looking
      ferocious. “Where is he, the scoundrel? Under the table? You wait. .
      .”
    

      My uncle dragged the kitten from under the table and shook him in the air.
    

      “Wretched little beast,” he muttered, smacking him on the ear.
      “Take that, take that! Will you shirk it next time? Wr-r-r-etch. . .
      .”
    

      Next day Praskovya heard again the summons.
    

      “Praskovya, there is a mouse caught! Bring the kitten here!”
    

      After the outrage of the previous day the kitten had taken refuge under
      the stove and had not come out all night. When Praskovya pulled him out
      and, carrying him by the scruff of the neck into the study, set him down
      before the mouse-trap, he trembled all over and mewed piteously.
    

      “Come, let him feel at home first,” Pyotr Demyanitch
      commanded. “Let him look and sniff. Look and learn! Stop, plague
      take you!” he shouted, noticing that the kitten was backing away
      from the mouse-trap. “I’ll thrash you! Hold him by the ear!
      That’s it. . . . Well now, set him down before the trap. . . .”
    

      My uncle slowly lifted the door of the trap . . . the mouse whisked under
      the very nose of the kitten, flung itself against Praskovya’s hand
      and fled under the cupboard; the kitten, feeling himself free, took a
      desperate bound and retreated under the sofa.
    

      “He’s let another mouse go!” bawled Pyotr Demyanitch.
      “Do you call that a cat? Nasty little beast! Thrash him! thrash him
      by the mousetrap!”
    

      When the third mouse had been caught, the kitten shivered all over at the
      sight of the mousetrap and its inmate, and scratched Praskovya’s
      hand. . . . After the fourth mouse my uncle flew into a rage, kicked the
      kitten, and said:
    

      “Take the nasty thing away! Get rid of it! Chuck it away! It’s
      no earthly use!”
    

      A year passed, the thin, frail kitten had turned into a solid and
      sagacious tom-cat. One day he was on his way by the back yards to an
      amatory interview. He had just reached his destination when he suddenly
      heard a rustle, and thereupon caught sight of a mouse which ran from a
      water-trough towards a stable; my hero’s hair stood on end, he
      arched his back, hissed, and trembling all over, took to ignominious
      flight.
    

      Alas! sometimes I feel myself in the ludicrous position of the flying cat.
      Like the kitten, I had in my day the honour of being taught Latin by my
      uncle. Now, whenever I chance to see some work of classical antiquity,
      instead of being moved to eager enthusiasm, I begin recalling, ut
      consecutivum, the irregular verbs, the sallow grey face of my uncle,
      the ablative absolute. . . . I turn pale, my hair stands up on my head,
      and, like the cat, I take to ignominious flight.