WHOM THE GODS DESTROYED

 I

 The most high gods have decided that too
much power over the hearts of men shall not be
given to other men, for then the givers are forgotten
in the gift and the smoke dies away from
the altars. So they kill the men who play with
souls. According to an ancient saying, before they
destroy the victim they make him mad. There are,
however, modifications of the process. Occasionally
they make him drunk.

 As I came down the board-walk that leads to
the ocean, I saw by his staggering and swaying
gait that the man was not only very drunk indeed,
but that he gloried in the fact. This was shown
by his brandishing arms and tossing head and
the defiant air with which he regarded the cottages,
before one of which he paused, leaned forward,
placing one hand dramatically at his ear,
and presently executed a wild dance of what was
apparently derision. A timid woman would have retreated, but I am not timid, except when I am
alone in the dark. Also I have what my brother-in-law
calls Bohemian tastes. As nearly as I have
been able to understand that phrase, it signifies
a great interest in people, especially when they
are at all odd. And this solitary, scornful dance
of a ragged man before the Averys' cottage was
odd in the extreme.

 So I walked quietly along. When I reached the
man I heard him muttering rapidly to himself,
while he rested from the exertion of his late performance.
What did dancing drunken men talk
about? I walked slower. My brother-in-law says
that a woman with any respect for the proprieties,
to say nothing of the conventions, would never
have done this. I have observed, however, that his
feelings for the proprieties and the conventions,
both of them, have on occasion suffered relapse,
more especially at those times, prior to his marriage
to my sister, when I, although supposed to
be walking and riding and rowing and naphtha-launching
with them, was frequently and inexcusably
absent. So I gather that the proprieties and the conventions, like many other things, are
relative.

 As I passed the man he turned and looked
crossly at me and spoke apparently to some one far
away behind me, for he spoke with much force.

 "Did you ever hear such damn foolishness?" he
demanded. Now there was nothing to hear but
Miss Kitty Avery playing Chopin's Fourth Ballade
in F minor. She played it badly, of course,
but nobody who knew Kitty Avery would have
imagined that she would play otherwise than
badly, and I have heard so much bad playing that
I didn't notice it very much anyway. I thought
it hardly probable that the man should know how
unfortunate Kitty's method and selection were, so
I passed directly by. Soon I heard his steps, and
I knew he was coming after me. While he was
yet some distance behind me he spoke again.

 "I suppose that fool of a woman thinks she can
play," he growled as he lurched against a lamp-post.
Then I did the unpardonable deed. I turned
and answered him.

 "How do you know it's a woman?" I asked.

  "Huh! Take me for a fool, don't you?" he said
scornfully, scuffling along unsteadily. "I'm drunk
as an owl, but I'm no fool! No. I know it's a
woman from the pawin' 'round she does. Bah!
Thinks she's playin'. Damn nonsense!" He sat
down carefully on the sand by the side of the walk
and wagged his head knowingly. I looked cautiously
about. No one was in sight. I bent down
and untied my shoe.

 "Perhaps you could play it better?" I suggested
sweetly. His jaw dropped with consternation.

 "Play it better! Oh, Lord! She says can I play
it better! Can-I-play-it-better? Well, I'll tell you
one thing. If I couldn't play it better, d'ye know
what I'd do? Do you?"

 "No," said I, and tied my shoe. He didn't talk
thickly as they do in books. On the contrary, he
brought out each word with a particularly clear
and final utterance.

 "Well, I'll tell you what I'd do. I'd go off and
drown my sorrers in drink! Yes, I would. Although
I'm so drunk that I wouldn't know when I was getting drunk on principle and when I was just
plain drunk. Le' me tell you somethin': I'm drunk
now! " He announced the fact with a gravity so
colossal as to render laughter impossible. I untied
the other shoe.

 "Can you really play Chopin?" I said. He
shook his fist at the Avery cottage.

 "What I can't play of Chopin you never heard
played! So that's the end o' that," he said. The
folly of the situation suddenly became clear to me.
I hastily tied my shoe and turned to go. He half
rose from the sand, but sank helplessly back.

 "Look here," he said confidentially, "I'm tired,
and I need m' rest. I got to have rest. We all need
rest. If you want to hear me play, you come to
the old hulk of a barn that's got the piano in it.
They call it the auditorium—au-di-to-ri-um." He
pronounced the syllables as if to a child of three.
"I'll be there. You come before supper. I'll be rested
then. I'd like to shoot that woman—thinks she
can play—damn nonsense—" I went on to the
beach.

  II

 My brother-in-law came down on the afternoon
boat, and of course he occupied our attention. His
theories, though often absurd, are certainly well
sustained. For instance, his ideas as to the connection
between genius and insanity. He says—but
I don't know why I speak of it. I defeated
him utterly. At length I left the room. I hate a
man who won't give up when he's beaten. I found
the Nice Boy on the piazza, and we sat and talked.
Really a charming fellow. And not so very young,
either. He told fascinating tales of a shipwreck
he'd experienced, where they sat on the bow as the
boat went down and traded sandwiches.

 "I gave Hunter two hams for a chicken, and
it was a mean swindle!" he said reminiscently.
"Speaking of sandwiches, I gave a chap ten cents
to buy one this afternoon. Awfully seedy looking.
Shabby clothes, stubbly beard, dirty hands,
not half sober, and what do you think he said?"
I remembered and blushed.

 "I don't know," I murmured.

 "He invited me to a recital—a piano recital!
He said he was going to play at five-thirty in the
auditorium, and I might come if I liked, though
it was a private affair! How is that for nerve? He
didn't look up to a hand organ."

 My curiosity grew. And then, I had a great
consciousness of not liking to disappoint even a
drunken man. He evidently thought I was coming.
I sketched lightly to the Nice Boy the affair
of the morning. He was not shocked. He was
amused. But my brother-in-law says that nothing
I could say could shock the Nice Boy. In fact, he
says, that if I mean nothing serious, I have no
business to let the Nice Boy think—but that is a
digression. It is one of my brother-in-law's prerogatives
to be as impertinent as he cares to be.

 "Shall we go over?" said I. "He is very probably
an accompanist, stranded here, with his engagement
ended. Perhaps he even plays well.
These things happen in books." The Nice Boy
shook his head.

 "We'll go, by all means," he said, "but don't
hope. He's not touched a piano this long time."

  So we gathered some shawls and cushions and
went over. The building was all dusty and smelled
of pine. As we stumbled in, the sound of a piano
met us. I own I was a bit excited. For one doubtful
second I listened, ready to adore. Then I
laughed nervously. We were not people in a book.
It was Mendelssohn's "Spring Song," played
rather slowly and with a mournful correctness. I
could feel the player's fingers thudding down on
the keys—one played it so when it was necessary
to use the notes. The Nice Boy smiled consolingly.

 "Too bad," he whispered. "Shall we go out
now?"

 "I should like to view the fragments of the
idol!" I whispered back. "Let's end the illusion
by seeing him!"

 So we tip-toed up to the benches, and looked
at the platform where the Steinway stood.
Twirling on the stool sat a girl of seventeen
or so, peering out into the gloom at us. It was
very startling. Now I felt that the strain was yet
to come. As I sank into one of the chairs a man rose slowly from a seat under the platform. It
was the stranger. He nodded jauntily at us.

 "Good thing you come," he announced cheerfully.
"I don't know how long I could stand that
girl. I guess she's related to the other," and he
shambled up the steps. His unsteady walk, his shaking
hand, as he clumsily pushed the chairs out of
the way, told their disagreeable story. He walked
straight up to the girl, and looking beyond her,
said easily, "Excuse me, miss, but I'm goin' to play
a little for some friends o' mine, an' I'll have to ask
you to quit for a while." The girl looked undecidedly
from him to us, but we had nothing to
say.

 "Come, come," he added impatiently, "you can
bang all you want in a few minutes, with nobody
to disturb you. Jus' now I'm goin' to do my own
turn."

 His assurance was so perfect, his intention to
command obedience so evident, that the child got
up and went slowly down the stairs, more curious
than angry. The man swept the music from the
rack, and lifted the top of the piano to its full height. Then with an impatient twitch he spun the
music-stool a few inches lower, and pulled it out.
The Nice Boy leaned over to me.

 "The preparations are imposing, anyhow," he
whispered. But I did not laugh. I felt nervous.
To be disappointed again would be too cruel! I
watched the soiled, untidy figure collapse onto
the stool. Then I shut my eyes, to hear without
prejudice of sight the opening triple-octave scale
of the professional pianist. For with such assurance
as he showed he should at least be able to
play the scales.

 The hall seemed so large and dim, I was so
alone—I was glad of the Nice Boy. Suppose it
should all be a horrible plot, and the tramp should
rush down with a revolver? Suppose—and then I
stopped thinking. For from far-away somewhere
came the softest, sweetest song. A woman was singing.
Nearer and nearer she came, over the hills,
in the lovely early morning; louder and louder she
sang—and it was the "Spring Song"! Now she
was with us—young, clear-eyed, happy, bursting
into delicious flights of laughter between the bars. Her eyes, I know, were grey. She did not run or
leap—she came steadily on, with a swift, strong,
swaying, lilting motion. She was all odorous of the
morning, all vocal with the spring. Her voice
laughed even while she sang, and the perfect,
smooth succession of the separate sounds was unlike
any effect I have ever heard. Now she passed—she
was gone by. Softer, fainter, ah, she was
gone! No, she turned her head, tossed us flowers,
and sang again, turned, and singing, left us.
One moment of soft echo—and then it was still.

 I breathed—for the first time since I heard her,
I thought. I opened my eyes. It was all black before
them, they had been closed so long. I did not
dare look at the Nice Boy. There was absolutely
nothing for him to say, but I was afraid he would
try to say it. He was staring at the platform. His
mouth was open, his eyes very large. Without
turning his face towards me, he said solemnly,
"And I gave him ten cents for a sandwich! Ten
cents for a sandwich!"

 Suddenly I heard sobs—heavy, awkward sobs.
I looked behind me. The girl had dropped for ward
on to the chair in front and was hysterically
chattering into her handkerchief.

 " I played that! I played that!" she wailed. "Oh,
he heard me! he did, he did!" I felt horribly
ashamed for her. How she must feel! A child can
suffer so.

 But the man at the piano gave a little chuckle
of satisfaction, and ran his hands up and down
the keys in a delirium of scales and arpeggios.
Then he hit heavily a deep, low note. It was like
a great, bass trumpet. A crashing chord: and
then the love-song of Germany and musicians
caught me up to heaven, or wherever people go
who love that tune—perhaps it is to Germany—and
I heard a great, magnificent man singing in a
great, magnificent baritone, the song that won
Clara Schumann's heart.

 Schubert sang sweetly, wonderfully. I cry like
a baby when one sings the Serenade even fairly
well. And dear Franz Abt has made most loving
melodies. But they were musicians singing, this
was a man. " Du meine Liebe, du! "—that was no
piano; it was a voice. And yet no human voice could be at once so limpid and so rich, so thrilling
and so clear. And now it crashed out in chords—heavy,
broken harmony. All the rapture of possession,
the very absolute of human joy were there—but
these are words, and that was love and music.

 I don't in the least know how long it lasted.
There was no time for me. The god at the piano
repeated it again and again, I think, as it is never
repeated in the singing, and always should be. I
know that the tears rolled over my cheeks and
dropped into my lap. I have a vague remembrance
of the Nice Boy's enthusiastically and brokenly
begging me to marry him to-night and go to Venice
with him to-morrow, and my ecstatically consenting
to that or anything else. I am sure he held
my hand during that period, for the rings cut in
so the next day. And I think—indeed I am quite
certain—but why consider one's self responsible for
such things? At any rate, it has never happened
since.

 And when it was over we went up hand in hand,
and the Nice Boy said, "What—what is your—your
name?" And I stared at him, expecting to see his dirty clothes drop off, and his trailing
clouds of glory wrap him 'round before he vanished
from our eyes. His heavy eyebrows bent together.
His knees shook the piano-stool. He was
labouring under an intense excitement. But I think
he was pleased at our faces.

 "What—what the devil does it matter to you
what I'm named?" he said roughly.

 "Oh, it doesn't matter at all, not at all," I said
meekly; "only we wanted, we wanted——" And
then, like that chit of seventeen, I cried, too. I am
such a fool about music.

 "Now you know what I mean when I say I can
play," he growled savagely. He seemed really terribly
excited, even angry. "I'll play one thing
more. Then you go home. When I think o' what
I might have done, great God, I can't die till I've
shown 'em! Can I? Can I die? You hear me! You
see"—his face was livid. His eyes gleamed like
coals. I ought to have been afraid, but I wasn't.

 "You shall show them!" I gasped. "You shall!
Will you play for the hotel? We can fill this place
for you. We can——"

  "Oh, you shut up!" he snarled. "You! I've
played to thousands, I have. You don't know anything
about it. It's this devil's drink that's killin'
me. It ruined me in Vienna. It spoiled the whole
thing in Paris. It's goin' to kill me." His voice
rose to a shriek. He dropped from the stool, and
from his pocket fell a bottle. The Nice Boy gave
a queer little sob.

 "Oh, it's dreadful, dreadful!" he whispered to
himself. He jumped up on the platform and seized
the man's shoulder.

 "Come, come," he said. "We'll help you. Come,
be a man! You stay here with us, and we'll take
care of you. Such a gift as yours shall not go for
nothing. Come over to the hotel, and I'll get you
a bed."

 The man staggered up. He was much older
than I had thought. There were deep, disagreeable
lines in his face. There was a coarseness, too—but,
oh, that "Spring Song"! Now, how can
that be? My brother-in-law says—but this is not
his story. The man got onto the seat somehow.

 "You're a decent fellow," he said. "When I've done playing, you go out. Right straight out.
D'ye hear? I'll come see you to-morrow morning."

 Then he shut his eyes and felt for the keys,
and played the Chopin Berceuse. And it is an
actual fact that I wanted to die then. Not suddenly—but
just to be rocked into rest, rocked into
rest, and not wake up any more. It was the purest,
sweetest, most inexpressibly touching thing I ever
heard. I felt so young—so trustful, somehow. I
knew that no harm would come. And then it sang
itself to sleep, and we went away and left him,
with his head resting on his hands that still pressed
the keys. And we never spoke. I think the girl
came out with us, but I'm not sure.

 At the door the Nice Boy gulped, and said in a
queer, shaky voice, "I'm not nearly good enough to
have sat by you—I know that—you seem so far
away—but I want to tell you." And I said that he
was much better than I—that none of us were good—that
I thought it would be all right in the end—that
after all it was being managed better
than we could arrange it—that perhaps heaven was more like what we used to think than what
we think now. There is no knowing what we might
have said if my brother-in-law had not come down
to see where I was. And then I went to sleep like
a baby.

 III

 I should like to end the story here. I should
like to leave him bowed over the keys and remember
only the most exquisite experience of my life
in connection with him. But there is the rest of
the tale, and it really needs telling.

 I didn't see the end. The Nice Boy and my
brother-in-law saw that, and I only know as much
as they will tell me. The Nice Boy went over and
got him the next morning. He said his name was
Decker. He said that he had spent the night in
the solemnest watching and praying, and he had
held the bottle in his hands and never touched a
drop of it. They gave him a bath and clothes, and
fed him steadily for two days. He grew fat before
our eyes. He looked nicer, more respectable, but more commonplace. He refused to touch the
piano, because it gave him such a craving for
drink.

 He hated to talk about himself. But he let slip
occasional remarks about London and Paris and
Vienna and Leipsic that took away one's breath.
He must have known strange people. Once he told
me a little story about Clara Schumann that implied
more than acquaintance, and he quoted Liszt
constantly. He was an American beyond a doubt,
we thought. He spoke vaguely of a secret that
even Liszt had missed. I guessed it was connected
with that wonderful singing quality that made
the instrument a human voice under his fingers.
When I asked him about it he laughed.

 "You wait," he said confidently. "You just
wait. I'll show you people something to make you
open your eyes. I know. You're a good audience,
you and your friend. You make a good air to
play in. You just wait."

 And I have waited. But never again shall I hear
that lovely girl sing across the hills. Never again
will my heart grow big, and ache and melt, and slip away to that song, "Du, Meine Leibe, Du."
Oh, it was not of this earth, that music. Perhaps
when I die I shall hear the Berceuse echo—I think
it may be so.

 Well, we got them all together. There must have
been a thousand. They came from across the bay
and all along the inlet. The piano was tuned, and
the people were seated, and I was just where we
were that night, and Mr. Decker was walking behind
the little curtain in a new dress-suit. He had
shaken hands with me just before. His hands were
cold as ice and they trembled in mine. I congratulated
him on the presence of Herr H—— from
Leipsic, who had been miraculously discovered just
across the bay; and Mr. J—— of New York, who
could place him musically in the most desirable
fashion; and asked him not to forget me, his
first audience, and his most sincere friend and
admirer.

 In his eyes I could swear I saw fright. Not nervousness,
not stage fear, but sheer, appalling terror.
It could not be, I thought, and my brother-in-law
told me to go down. Then he stepped to the front and told them all how pleased, how
proud and delighted he was to be the means of
introducing to them one whom he confidently
trusted would leave this stage to-night one of the
recognised pianists of the world. He described
briefly the man's extraordinary effect upon two of
his friends, who were not, he was good enough to
say, likely to be mistaken in their musical estimates.
He hoped that they all appreciated their
good fortune in being the first people in this part
of the world to hear Mr. Decker, and he took great
pleasure in introducing him.

 At this point Mr. Decker should have come forward.
As he did not, my brother-in-law stepped
back to get him. He found the Nice Boy alone in
the room behind the stage, looking distinctly nervous.
He explained that Mr. Decker had gone out
for a moment to get the air—he was naturally a
bit excited, and the room was close. My brother-in-law
said nothing, and they waited a few minutes
in strained silence. Finally they walked about
the room looking at each other.

 "Do you think it was quite wise to let him go?" said my brother-in-law, with compressed lips. The
Nice Boy is horribly afraid of my brother-in-law.

 "I'll—I'll go out and—and get him," he
gasped, and dashed out into the dark, cursing
himself for a fool. This was unfortunate, for in
five seconds more Mr. Decker had reeled into the
room. He explained in a very thick voice that he
had never been able to play without the drink;
that a little brandy set his fingers free, but that
he had taken too much and must rest.

 When the Nice Boy got back—he had brought
two great pails of cold water and a fresh dress-shirt—it
was too late. The man lay in a heap on
the floor, and my brother-in-law stood, white and
raging, talking to the heap. The man was drunkenly,
horribly asleep. The Boy said that the worst
five minutes he ever spent were those in which he
poured water over the heap on the floor and shook
it, my brother-in-law watching with an absolutely
indescribable expression!

 Then he got out on the platform and said something.
Mr. Decker had met with an accident—would
some one get a doctor?—was there perhaps a doctor in the audience?—they could realise his
position—and more of that sort.

 I knew well enough. When the doctor went in
he found the Boy shaking the drunken brute on
the floor, and they told the doctor all about it,
and then went out by the other door. And they
got a carriage and took Decker to the hotel.

 I don't know—it seemed not wholly his fault.
And his face showed that he had suffered. But
the men would hear nothing of that. My brother-in-law
says that for a woman who is really as
hard as nails I have more apparent and sthetic
sympathy than any one he ever knew. And that
may be so.

 The people took it very nicely. They cleared
the floor, and the younger ones danced and the
older ones talked, and the manager sent over ices
and coffee, and it turned out the affair of the
season. And they were all very grateful to my
brother-in-law and his friend, and quite forgot
about the strange artist.

 Whether he ever fully realised what the evening
had been we never knew, because when they went in the next morning to see how he was, they
found him dead. The doctor said that the excitement,
the terror, the sudden cutting off of
liquor, with the sudden wild drinking, were too
much for an overstrained heart, and that he had
probably died soon after he was carried to his
room.

 It seemed to me a little sad that while they were
dancing, the man whom they had come to see——. But
my brother-in-law says that I turn to the
morbid view of things, and that that was the very
blessing of the whole affair—that the crowd
should have been so pleased, and that the horrible
situation should have ended so smoothly. Because
such a man is better dead, he says. And of
course he is right. Life would be horrible to him,
one can see.

 But I have noticed that the Nice Boy and the
girl who heard him play do not feel so sure that
his death was best. For myself, I shall always feel
that the world has lost its musical master. I have
heard the music-makers of two generations, and
not one of them has excelled his exquisite light ness
and force of touch, and that wonderful singing
stress—oh! I could cry to think of it! And
when we go abroad next I shall find out the name
of the man who played in Leipsic and Paris and
Vienna—for he must have played there once; he
said he had played to thousands—and see if any
one there has heard of his secret, his wonderful
singing through the keys.

 For, though my brother-in-law says that the
musical temperament in combination with a Bohemian
tendency gives an emotional basis which
is absolutely unsafe and therefore untrustworthy
in its reports of actual facts, I know that the most
glorious music of my life gained nothing from my
imagination. For there were three of us who saw
the spring come over the hills that night. Three
of us heard the triumph-song of love incarnate,
and thrilled to it. Three of us knew for once a
peace that passed our understanding, and had
the comfort of little children in their mother's
arms.

 And though it is not true, as my brother-in-law
insinuates, that a man need only be able to play my soul away in order to be ranked by me among
the angels, I shall continue to insist that somewhere,
somehow, the beautiful sounds he made are
accounted to him for just a little righteousness!