WRESSLEY OF THE FOREIGN OFFICE.
    

    I closed and drew for my love's sake,
     That now is false to me,
    And I slew the Riever of Tarrant Moss,
     And set Dumeny free.

    And ever they give me praise and gold,
     And ever I moan my loss,
    For I struck the blow for my false love's sake,
     And not for the men at the Moss.
                  —Tarrant Moss.


      One of the many curses of our life out here is the want of atmosphere in
      the painter's sense. There are no half-tints worth noticing. Men stand out
      all crude and raw, with nothing to tone them down, and nothing to scale
      them against. They do their work, and grow to think that there is nothing
      but their work, and nothing like their work, and that they are the real
      pivots on which the administration turns. Here is an instance of this
      feeling. A half-caste clerk was ruling forms in a Pay Office. He said to
      me:—“Do you know what would happen if I added or took away one
      single line on this sheet?” Then, with the air of a conspirator:—“It
      would disorganize the whole of the Treasury payments throughout the whole
      of the Presidency Circle! Think of that?”
     

      If men had not this delusion as to the ultra-importance of their own
      particular employments, I suppose that they would sit down and kill
      themselves. But their weakness is wearisome, particularly when the
      listener knows that he himself commits exactly the same sin.
    

      Even the Secretariat believes that it does good when it asks an
      over-driven Executive Officer to take census of wheat-weevils through a
      district of five thousand square miles.
    

      There was a man once in the Foreign Office—a man who had grown
      middle-aged in the department, and was commonly said, by irreverent
      juniors, to be able to repeat Aitchison's “Treaties and Sunnuds”
       backwards, in his sleep. What he did with his stored knowledge only the
      Secretary knew; and he, naturally, would not publish the news abroad. This
      man's name was Wressley, and it was the Shibboleth, in those days, to say:—“Wressley
      knows more about the Central Indian States than any living man.” If you
      did not say this, you were considered one of mean understanding.
    

      Now-a-days, the man who says that he knows the ravel of the inter-tribal
      complications across the Border is of more use; but in Wressley's time,
      much attention was paid to the Central Indian States. They were called
      “foci” and “factors,” and all manner of imposing names.
    

      And here the curse of Anglo-Indian life fell heavily. When Wressley lifted
      up his voice, and spoke about such-and-such a succession to such-and-such
      a throne, the Foreign Office were silent, and Heads of Departments
      repeated the last two or three words of Wressley's sentences, and tacked
      “yes, yes,” on them, and knew that they were “assisting the Empire to
      grapple with seriouspolitical contingencies.” In most big undertakings,
      one or two men do the work while the rest sit near and talk till the ripe
      decorations begin to fall.
    

      Wressley was the working-member of the Foreign Office firm, and, to keep
      him up to his duties when he showed signs of flagging, he was made much of
      by his superiors and told what a fine fellow he was.
    

      He did not require coaxing, because he was of tough build, but what he
      received confirmed him in the belief that there was no one quite so
      absolutely and imperatively necessary to the stability of India as
      Wressley of the Foreign Office. There might be other good men, but the
      known, honored and trusted man among men was Wressley of the Foreign
      Office. We had a Viceroy in those days who knew exactly when to “gentle” a
      fractious big man and to hearten up a collar-galled little one, and so
      keep all his team level. He conveyed to Wressley the impression which I
      have just set down; and even tough men are apt to be disorganized by a
      Viceroy's praise. There was a case once—but that is another story.
    

      All India knew Wressley's name and office—it was in Thacker and
      Spink's Directory—but who he was personally, or what he did, or what
      his special merits were, not fifty men knew or cared. His work filled all
      his time, and he found no leisure to cultivate acquaintances beyond those
      of dead Rajput chiefs with Ahir blots in their 'scutcheons. Wressley would
      have made a very good Clerk in the Herald's College had he not been a
      Bengal Civilian.
    

      Upon a day, between office and office, great trouble came to Wressley—overwhelmed
      him, knocked him down, and left him gasping as though he had been a little
      school-boy. Without reason, against prudence, and at a moment's notice, he
      fell in love with a frivolous, golden-haired girl who used to tear about
      Simla Mall on a high, rough waler, with a blue velvet jockey-cap crammed
      over her eyes. Her name was Venner—Tillie Venner—and she was
      delightful.
    

      She took Wressley's heart at a hand-gallop, and Wressley found that it was
      not good for man to live alone; even with half the Foreign Office Records
      in his presses.
    

      Then Simla laughed, for Wressley in love was slightly ridiculous.
    

      He did his best to interest the girl in himself—that is to say, his
      work—and she, after the manner of women, did her best to appear
      interested in what, behind his back, she called “Mr. Wressley's Wajahs”;
      for she lisped very prettily. She did not understand one little thing
      about them, but she acted as if she did. Men have married on that sort of
      error before now.
    

      Providence, however, had care of Wressley. He was immensely struck with
      Miss Venner's intelligence. He would have been more impressed had he heard
      her private and confidential accounts of his calls. He held peculiar
      notions as to the wooing of girls. He said that the best work of a man's
      career should be laid reverently at their feet.
    

      Ruskin writes something like this somewhere, I think; but in ordinary life
      a few kisses are better and save time.
    

      About a month after he had lost his heart to Miss Venner, and had been
      doing his work vilely in consequence, the first idea of his “Native Rule
      in Central India” struck Wressley and filled him with joy. It was, as he
      sketched it, a great thing—the work of his life—a really
      comprehensive survey of a most fascinating subject—to be written
      with all the special and laboriously acquired knowledge of Wressley of the
      Foreign Office—a gift fit for an Empress.
    

      He told Miss Venner that he was going to take leave, and hoped, on his
      return, to bring her a present worthy of her acceptance. Would she wait?
      Certainly she would. Wressley drew seventeen hundred rupees a month. She
      would wait a year for that. Her mamma would help her to wait.
    

      So Wressley took one year's leave and all the available documents, about a
      truck-load, that he could lay hands on, and went down to Central India
      with his notion hot in his head. He began his book in the land he was
      writing of. Too much official correspondence had made him a frigid
      workman, and he must have guessed that he needed the white light of local
      color on his palette. This is a dangerous paint for amateurs to play with.
    

      Heavens, how that man worked! He caught his Rajahs, analyzed his Rajahs,
      and traced them up into the mists of Time and beyond, with their queens
      and their concubines. He dated and cross-dated, pedigreed and
      triple-pedigreed, compared, noted, connoted, wove, strung, sorted,
      selected, inferred, calendared and counter-calendared for ten hours a day.
      And, because this sudden and new light of Love was upon him, he turned
      those dry bones of history and dirty records of misdeeds into things to
      weep or to laugh over as he pleased. His heart and soul were at the end of
      his pen, and they got into the ink. He was dowered with sympathy, insight,
      humor and style for two hundred and thirty days and nights; and his book
      was a Book. He had his vast special knowledge with him, so to speak; but
      the spirit, the woven-in human Touch, the poetry and the power of the
      output, were beyond all special knowledge. But I doubt whether he knew the
      gift that was in him then, and thus he may have lost some happiness. He
      was toiling for Tillie Venner, not for himself.
    

      Men often do their best work blind, for some one else's sake.
    

      Also, though this has nothing to do with the story, in India where every
      one knows every one else, you can watch men being driven, by the women who
      govern them, out of the rank-and-file and sent to take up points alone. A
      good man once started, goes forward; but an average man, so soon as the
      woman loses interest in his success as a tribute to her power, comes back
      to the battalion and is no more heard of.
    

      Wressley bore the first copy of his book to Simla and, blushing and
      stammering, presented it to Miss Venner. She read a little of it.
    

      I give her review verbatim:—“Oh, your book? It's all about those
      how-wid Wajahs. I didn't understand it.”.........
    

      Wressley of the Foreign Office was broken, smashed,—I am not
      exaggerating—by this one frivolous little girl. All that he could
      say feebly was:—“But, but it's my magnum opus! The work of my life.”
       Miss Venner did not know what magnum opus meant; but she knew that Captain
      Kerrington had won three races at the last Gymkhana. Wressley didn't press
      her to wait for him any longer. He had sense enough for that.
    

      Then came the reaction after the year's strain, and Wressley went back to
      the Foreign Office and his “Wajahs,” a compiling, gazetteering,
      report-writing hack, who would have been dear at three hundred rupees a
      month. He abided by Miss Venner's review. Which proves that the
      inspiration in the book was purely temporary and unconnected with himself.
      Nevertheless, he had no right to sink, in a hill-tarn, five packing-cases,
      brought up at enormous expense from Bombay, of the best book of Indian
      history ever written.
    

      When he sold off before retiring, some years later, I was turning over his
      shelves, and came across the only existing copy of “Native Rule in Central
      India”—the copy that Miss Venner could not understand. I read it,
      sitting on his mule-trucks, as long as the light lasted, and offered him
      his own price for it. He looked over my shoulder for a few pages and said
      to himself drearily:—“Now, how in the world did I come to write such
      damned good stuff as that?” Then to me:—“Take it and keep it. Write
      one of your penny-farthing yarns about its birth. Perhaps—perhaps—the
      whole business may have been ordained to that end.”
     

      Which, knowing what Wressley of the Foreign Office was once, struck me as
      about the bitterest thing that I had ever heard a man say of his own work.