YVETTE SAMORIS

 “The Comtesse Samoris.”

 “That lady in black over there?”

 “The very one. She's wearing mourning for her daughter, whom she
      killed.”

 “You don't mean that seriously? How did she die?”

 “Oh! it is a very simple story, without any crime in it, any
      violence.”

 “Then what really happened?”

 “Almost nothing. Many courtesans are born to be virtuous women, they
      say; and many women called virtuous are born to be courtesans—is
      that not so? Now, Madame Samoris, who was born a courtesan, had a daughter
      born a virtuous woman, that's all.”

 “I don't quite understand you.”

 “I'll—explain what I mean. The comtesse is nothing but a
      common, ordinary parvenue originating no one knows where. A Hungarian or
      Wallachian countess or I know not what. She appeared one winter in
      apartments she had taken in the Champs Elysees, that quarter for
      adventurers and adventuresses, and opened her drawing-room to the first
      comer or to any one that turned up.

 “I went there. Why? you will say. I really can't tell you. I went
      there, as every one goes to such places because the women are facile and
      the men are dishonest. You know that set composed of filibusters with
      varied decorations, all noble, all titled, all unknown at the embassies,
      with the exception of those who are spies. All talk of their honor without
      the slightest occasion for doing so, boast of their ancestors, tell you
      about their lives, braggarts, liars, sharpers, as dangerous as the false
      cards they have up their sleeves, as delusive as their names—in
      short, the aristocracy of the bagnio.

 “I adore these people. They are interesting to study, interesting to
      know, amusing to understand, often clever, never commonplace like public
      functionaries. Their wives are always pretty, with a slight flavor of
      foreign roguery, with the mystery of their existence, half of it perhaps
      spent in a house of correction. They have, as a rule, magnificent eyes and
      incredible hair. I adore them also.

 “Madame Samoris is the type of these adventuresses, elegant, mature
      and still beautiful. Charming feline creatures, you feel that they are
      vicious to the marrow of their bones. You find them very amusing when you
      visit them; they give card parties; they have dances and suppers; in
      short, they offer you all the pleasures of social life.

 “And she had a daughter—a tall, fine-looking girl, always
      ready for amusement, always full of laughter and reckless gaiety—a
      true adventuress' daughter—but, at the same time, an innocent,
      unsophisticated, artless girl, who saw nothing, knew nothing, understood
      nothing of all the things that happened in her father's house.

 “The girl was simply a puzzle to me. She was a mystery. She lived
      amid those infamous surroundings with a quiet, tranquil ease that was
      either terribly criminal or else the result of innocence. She sprang from
      the filth of that class like a beautiful flower fed on corruption.”

 “How do you know about them?”

 “How do I know? That's the funniest part of the business! One
      morning there was a ring at my door, and my valet came up to tell me that
      M. Joseph Bonenthal wanted to speak to me. I said directly:

 “'And who is this gentleman?' My valet replied: 'I don't know,
      monsieur; perhaps 'tis some one that wants employment.' And so it was. The
      man wanted me to take him as a servant. I asked him where he had been
      last. He answered: 'With the Comtesse Samoris.' 'Ah!' said I, 'but my
      house is not a bit like hers.' 'I know that well, monsieur,' he said, 'and
      that's the very reason I want to take service with monsieur. I've had
      enough of these people: a man may stay a little while with them, but he
      won't remain long with them.' I required an additional man servant at the
      time and so I took him.

 “A month later Mademoiselle Yvette Samoris died mysteriously, and
      here are all the details of her death I could gather from Joseph, who got
      them from his sweetheart, the comtesse's chambermaid.

 “It was a ball night, and two newly arrived guests were chatting
      behind a door. Mademoiselle Yvette, who had just been dancing, leaned
      against this door to get a little air.

 “They did not see her approaching, but she heard what they were
      saying. And this was what they said:

 “'But who is the father of the girl?'

 “'A Russian, it appears; Count Rouvaloff. He never comes near the
      mother now.'

 “'And who is the reigning prince to-day?'

 “'That English prince standing near the window; Madame Samoris
      adores him. But her adoration of any one never lasts longer than a month
      or six weeks. Nevertheless, as you see, she has a large circle of
      admirers. All are called—and nearly all are chosen. That kind of
      thing costs a good deal, but—hang it, what can you expect?'

 “'And where did she get this name of Samoris?'

 “'From the only man perhaps that she ever loved—a Jewish
      banker from Berlin who goes by the name of Samuel Morris.'

 “'Good. Thanks. Now that I know what kind of woman she is and have
      seen her, I'm off!'

 “What a shock this was to the mind of a young girl endowed with all
      the instincts of a virtuous woman! What despair overwhelmed that simple
      soul! What mental tortures quenched her unbounded gaiety, her delightful
      laughter, her exultant satisfaction with life! What a conflict took place
      in that youthful heart up to the moment when the last guest had left!
      Those were things that Joseph could not tell me. But, the same night,
      Yvette abruptly entered her mother's room just as the comtesse was getting
      into bed, sent out the lady's maid, who was close to the door, and,
      standing erect and pale and with great staring eyes, she said:

 “'Mamma, listen to what I heard a little while ago during the ball.'

 “And she repeated word for word the conversation just as I told it
      to you.

 “The comtesse was so stunned that she did not know what to say in
      reply at first. When she recovered her self-possession she denied
      everything and called God to witness that there was no truth in the story.

 “The young girl went away, distracted but not convinced. And she
      began to watch her mother.

 “I remember distinctly the strange alteration that then took place
      in her. She became grave and melancholy. She would fix on us her great
      earnest eyes as if she wanted to read what was at the bottom of our
      hearts. We did not know what to think of her and used to imagine that she
      was looking out for a husband.

 “One evening she overheard her mother talking to her admirer and
      later saw them together, and her doubts were confirmed. She was
      heartbroken, and after telling her mother what she had seen, she said
      coldly, like a man of business laying down the terms of an agreement:

 “'Here is what I have determined to do, mamma: We will both go away
      to some little town, or rather into the country. We will live there
      quietly as well as we can. Your jewelry alone may be called a fortune. If
      you wish to marry some honest man, so much the better; still better will
      it be if I can find one. If you don't consent to do this, I will kill
      myself.'

 “This time the comtesse ordered her daughter to go to bed and never
      to speak again in this manner, so unbecoming in the mouth of a child
      toward her mother.

 “Yvette's answer to this was: 'I give you a month to reflect. If, at
      the end of that month, we have not changed our way of living, I will kill
      myself, since there is no other honorable issue left to my life.'

 “And she left the room.

 “At the end of a month the Comtesse Samoris had resumed her usual
      entertainments, as though nothing had occurred. One day, under the pretext
      that she had a bad toothache, Yvette purchased a few drops of chloroform
      from a neighboring chemist. The next day she purchased more, and every
      time she went out she managed to procure small doses of the narcotic. She
      filled a bottle with it.

 “One morning she was found in bed, lifeless and already quite cold,
      with a cotton mask soaked in chloroform over her face.

 “Her coffin was covered with flowers, the church was hung in white.
      There was a large crowd at the funeral ceremony.

 “Ah! well, if I had known—but you never can know—I would
      have married that girl, for she was infernally pretty.”

 “And what became of the mother?”

 “Oh! she shed a lot of tears over it. She has only begun to receive
      visits again for the past week.”

 “And what explanation is given of the girl's death?”

 “Oh! they pretended that it was an accident caused by a new stove,
      the mechanism of which got out of order. As a good many such accidents
      have occurred, the thing seemed probable enough.”